Title:
A Review on Perovskite-Type LaFeO3 Based Electrodes for CO2
Reduction in Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells: Current Understanding
of Structure?Functional Property Relationships

Abstract:
 Mixed ionic and electronic conductors (MIECs) are being studied extensively as a potential replacement for cermet catalysts in solid oxide cells (SOCs)? collectively named for solid oxide fuel cells and solid oxide electrolysis cells?due to their high activity, great stability, and low cost. Perovskite-type LaFeO3-based catalysts are one of the most promising electrodes for SOCs. This review paper provides an update on the chemical composition?crystal structure?physical property relationships and an understanding of the electrochemical reaction mechanisms in the perovskite-type structure LaFeO3 electrodes. Mechanisms for electrochemical CO2 reduction on the perovskite structure surface and oxygen di?usion are discussed. Furthermore, the electrochemical performance enhancement strategies such as composite electrodes and nanoparticles ex-solution are brie?y presented together with industrialization issues, e.g., gas impurities and stability of the interconnecting materials. 
----------------------


Text:
----------------------
High temperature solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) are a
promising method for syngas production and organic
chemicals synthesis. The main advantage of the SOEC is
that fossil fuels burning byproducts can be used as a feeding
gas, which can reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The SOEC
can be used in the fuel cell mode to produce electricity with a
high e?ciency (Figure 1). Many di?erent materials are
currently being developed to be used as electrode catalysts
for SOECs. There are some requirements such as high catalytic
activity for redox reactions, stability in operating environments,
and chemical stability with cell components. The most obvious
candidate is a widely used composite Ni?Y-doped ZrO2 (Ni-
YSZ) cermet electrode for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs).
However, in metal-ceramic electrodes the electrochemical
reactions only occur at the so-called triple-phase boundary
(TPB) where the ionic conducting phase (YSZ), electronic
conducting phase (Ni), and gas phase meet. Hence, the cell
performance is limited by the availablity of the TPB length.1
Another issue is that Ni particles oxidize when water and
water/CO2 coelectrolysis is taking place, which leads to NiO
formation and a loss of electronic conductivity.2 Moreover, Ni-
YSZ cermets are prone to carbon formation, sulfur poisoning,
and Ni segregation.3,4
Mixed ionic and electronic conductors (MIECs) are being
developed to replace the Ni-YSZ electrode. These MIEC
materials demonstrate high catalytic activity, redox stability,
and sulfur tolerance compared to Ni-YSZ.5,6 Furthermore,
several MIECs have demonstrated high stability in CO2/CO at
an elevated temperature.7?9 in which the entire surface is
electrochemically active leading to a signi?cant performance
improvement, unlike cermet electrodes, due to MIEC?gas
interface activity (dual-phase-boundary, DPB). Fluorite-type
perovsk ite-type LaFeO3,
La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3??, double perovskite-type
Sr2MgMoO6, and Nd2WO6 oxides are reported as potential
electrodes for SOCs.10?13 Among these families of MIECs,
doped lanthanum ferrites were recently developed as SOEC
cathodes due to their good catalytic activity, electronic
conductivity, and oxygen mobility.14?16 Since perovskite-type
structure oxides are currently being widely explored, this article
is aimed to provide an overview of LaFeO3 electrodes for
SOECs.
The naturally occurring perovskite mineral, CaTiO3, has
simple origins, but the complexity built around the synthetic
perovskite-like structure with a general chemical formula of
ABX3 (A = mono-, di-, and or trivalent cations; B = tri-, tetra-,
and pentavalent cations; X = mono-, di-, and trivalent anions).
The ideal cubic perovskite crystal structure is built up of AX3
close packed layers with 1/4 of the octahedral holes ?lled with
B-site cations. The A-site cation is usually large (?1.4 Å) and
coordinated by 12 anions, and the B-site is small (?0.6 Å) and
octahedrally coordinated by anions. The B-site octahedra form
a framework of corner sharing octahedra, and depending on
the size of the B-site cation di?erent interstices spaces are
created that can accommodate di?erent ionic radius A-site
cations in the perovskite framework.
The crystal structure of a primitive cubic perovskite ABO3 ?
SrTiO3 is shown in Figure 2. The ideal cubic perovskite
Glazer Notation.17 The distortions in perovskites can usually
be explained using three common principles which include
size, a change in oxidation states, and Jahn?Teller e?ects.18,19
In order to determine the stability of possible perovskite
materials, Goldschmidt developed a formula that uses the
geometric structural identity of the perovskite structure and
the ionic radii of the A- and B-site cations (rA and rB) and
anion (rO).20 This Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) is de?ned
as
t =
The Goldschmidt tolerance factor when equal to 1 represents
an ideal cubic perovskite (e.g., SrTiO3). If the t number drops
below 0.9, the structure shifts toward either an orthorhombic
or a rhombohedral distortion caused by di?erent octahedral
tilting (e.g., CaTiO3). When the tolerance factor is greater than
1, the perovskite structure typically shifts toward a tetragonal
or hexagonal distortion (e.g., BaTiO3 and BaNiO3).
Pbnm
R3c
A second phase transition occurs at approximately 1867 ±
30 °C from rhombohedral (R3?c) to cubic (Pm3?m) (Figure 3).
This transition is second order in nature and very close to the
material’s melting temperature (1890 °C), and therefore, it has
not been experimentally fully investigated. It must be noted
that there have been only a few studies regarding LaFeO3,
while many doped derivatives have been widely studied. Figure
5 shows cations that have been successfully added to LaFeO3
and which sites (La or Fe) they were determined to
occupy.7,25?58 To our best of knowledge, the local structure
of undoped LaFeO3 has not yet been investigated, most likely
due to the complexity of magnetic neutron total scattering.
addition of Sr changes the average bond lengths between the
A-site and oxygen, which get longer, and the B-site and oxygen,
which shortens them. The experimental bond lengths can be
seen in Table 3. Ca-doping in LaFeO3 o?ers a unique
opportunity to study the e?ect of defects on the structure
without changing the size of the A-site cation.54?57 The
solubility limit of Ca in LaFeO3 is controversial, but values up
to x = 0.67 have been reported. The structure retains the
orthorhombic (Pnma) phase through the entire solid solution,
and the unit cell volume decreases in a linear fashion. The
overall dc electrical conductivity is enhanced by several orders
of magnitude with increasing Ca content, and at x = 0.20 the
conductivity reaches a value of 7.8 S·m?1 at 800 °C.54 The
bond length between the A-site and oxygen increase with Ca
doping until x = 0.2 at which point this bond starts to decrease,
while the B-site to oxygen bond length decreases with
increasing Ca content in La1?xCaxFeO3?? (Table 3)
The Ba-substituted Ba0.5La0.5FeO3 crystallizes in the
primitive cubic space group Pm3?m (No. 221) with a unit
cell edge length of a = 3.935 Å and one formula unit per unit
cell (Z = 1).38 The A-site cations have face-sharing polyhedral
units. Neither the A-site or B-site cation ordering has been
observed. The addition of Ba to the LaFeO3 lattice greatly
increases the A-site to oxygen bond length in order to
accommodate the larger cation, and the average B-site to
oxygen bond length does shorten a small amount (Table 3).
The B-site of LaFeO3 is commonly doped with transition metal
cations due to similar ionic radii between the dopant and iron.
The e?ects of Cr, Mn, Co, Ni, and Cu have been extensively
Co and Ni as these late transition metals can change the
structure from orthorhombic to rhombohedral. The solid
solution between LaFeO3 and LaNiO3 is smooth with a
composition phase transition around the 50?50 composition
from Pnma to R3?c.30,31 This composition commonly displays
both phases due to a ?rst order phase transition near room
temperature; the structure is orthorhombic below ?27 °C and
rhombohedral above ?27 °C.31 The most studied composition
is LaFe0.8Co0.2O3?? due to its relationship to the codoped high-
When LaFeO3 is doped with Co, the structure remains
orthorhombic up to x = 0.40 in LaFe1?xCoxO3?? and
transitions from orthorhombic to rhombohedral at about the
50?50 composition. A small multiphase region spans between
0.40 < x < 0.60 where both the rhombohedral and
orthorhombic phases coexist.28,29 LaFeO3 has been codoped
with both Sr and Co with the following chemical formula,
La0.6Sr0.4CoyFe1?yO3?? (y = 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3), in order to
enhance both the ionic and the electronic conductivities.66?70
which has a decent p-type electronic conductivity and high
catalytic activity for oxygen exchange.2?4 This material has also
been studied at temperatures as high as 1000 °C in SOECs for
CO2 reduction.2 The thermal stability of this composition was
investigated by coulometric titrations as a function of partial
oxygen pressure to elucidate the redox state. The results
indicate that this composition is stable at 750 °C and 10?5
atm.3 The structure remains rhombohedral at 1000 °C, which
may be an indication that the rhombohedral structure has a
relationship with the observed properties.
The e?ects of Cr and Mn should also be mentioned as they
are bene?cial to dope multivalent transition metals into the
structure to assist with the catalytic function of CO2 reduction.
A full solid solution between LaFeO3 and LaCrO3 can be
achieved.71 These compositions crystallize in the orthorhombic
space group Pbnm. The main composition of interest is
LaFe0.5Cr0.5O3 as the conductivity reaches a maximum.72 This
composition also displays excellent oxygen evaluation reaction
(OER) performance.73 The addition of manganese, La-
Fe1?xMnxO3, drives a disorder induced localization of charge
carriers. This in turn increases the overall electrical
conductivity as a function of Mn content, up to x = 0.5.74
The catalytic performance of Mn-substituted LaFe1?xMnxO3
samples exhibits a low charge transfer resistance and abundant
oxygen ion species on the surface of the material to enhance its
catalytic performance.75
To summarize, the A-site is typically doped with alkaline
earth ions to control the ionic conductivity of the doped
LaFeO3 material. A necessary modi?cation is to make sure the
reduction of CO2 is driven in an e?cient manner, as the
di?usion of oxygen through the crystal structure is limited.
Doping Sr is typically preferred over Ca and Ba due to higher
overall conductivities, which is intensi?ed by higher solubility
limits and disorder caused by cation ionic radii mismatch. The
B-site is responsible for the catalytic sequestration of CO2 and
electron transfer that initiates the reduction of CO2 into useful
chemical streams. The usage of multivalent cations such as Cr
or Mn on the B-site helps to improve both electronic
conductivity of the material and electron transfer between
the electrode material and the feedstock gas.
A high oxygen conductivity is very important for e?cient
SOEC operation; thus, the enhancement of the oxide ion
conductivity and a better understanding of the transport
mechanisms within the crystal lattice are critical. This is
especially important for MIEC catalysts, which often have
much lower ionic conductivity, compared to solid electrolytes.
Recent studies have been mainly focused on improving the
transport properties, especially for perovskite-type structure
compounds.76 Oxygen migration in a solid is typically driven
by oxygen vacancies, which are present within the crystal
lattice. There are two important parameters that can explain
the oxide conductivity in oxides, which include the oxygen
vacancy concentration and the vacancy migration energy
barrier. Both are experimentally measurable and commonly
used in computational methods to predict the impact of
dopants on the material’s conductivity.77 For a more detailed
discussion regarding the success of computational modeling
involving molecular dynamics and DFT of perovskite-type
MIECs, the reader is referred to the papers published
elsewhere.78,79
DFT+U is often used to predict the formation energy of
oxygen vacancies. Lee et al. were able to calculate the
formation energy values and defect concentration for LaMnO3
in temperatures ranging between 600 and 1200 °C.80 The
obtained data was in good agreement with the experimental
values reported previously. In addition, valuable information
regarding the defect chemistry and oxygen tracer di?usivity
was obtained. Another study demonstrated that single crystals
of LaFeO3 and LaCoO3 had a higher tracer di?usion
coe?cient (D0) for oxide ions when the concentration of the
oxygen vacancies was increased. The proportional relationship
between D0 and the oxygen partial pressure (pO2) was
established. These ?ndings lead to the conclusion that the
oxygen di?usion in this perovskite structure follows a vacancy
migration mechanism. It was also shown that increasing the
substitution of La3+ with Sr2+ led to either more Fe4+/Co4+ or
more oxide ion vacancies, and an increase in the oxide ion
conductivity was observed. Sr-doping in LaFeO3 is a well-
established method for increasing the oxygen ion conductiv-
ity.81,82 In both LaFeO3 and LaCoO3, vacancy formation is
observed with a dominating redox process and a lower vacancy
formation energy.83?85
The oxide ion vacancy formation energy, migration energy,
and di?usion (D) can be related by expression 2.84
where A the is pre-exponential term, ?Hf,vac is the enthalpy of
oxygen vacancy formation, ?Hmlg is the enthalpy of the oxide
ion migration, kb is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the absolute
temperature. Computational methods to calculate the en-
thalpies include the classical potential approach from Jones and
Islam83 and quantum mechanical methods such as DFT+U77,85
or quantum Monte Carlo.86 The classical potential approach is
a very e?cient method as the calculation is reduced to the
long-range Coulombic repulsion and the short-range Born
potential treating repulsion and van der Waals attraction,87
?ij(r) = Aij exp(?r/?ij) ? (Cij/r6), and the results were
calculated using the GULP code,88 which can also be used to
calculate polymers.89 Quantum mechanical methods such as
DFT+U treat valence electrons individually, and hence, this
technique requires more time. These techniques are used to
calculate energy barriers between two energy minima to obtain
the di?usion constant. Dealing with defect structures makes it
more expensive to run with DFT.86 Pure DFT calculations do
not include kinetic terms which are important for a di?usion
pathway investigation.87 To investigate the di?usion, a
combination of classical potentials and DFT calculations
such as the di?usion Monte Carlo (DMC) method has been
applied.90 The atoms of interest are treated with a many
electron model while everything else is simulated using
classical potentials.
Considering there are two distinct crystallographic positions
for oxygen, each oxygen position has the potential to migrate
under a di?erent mechanism in LaFeO3. The ?rst oxygen
position (O1) lies on the same level as the lanthanum cations,
and oxygen in this position acts as anaxial oxygens in the iron
octahedra; the other oxygen position (O2) acts as the
equatorial oxygen positions in the layers of iron cations. The
vacancy formation energy only di?ers by 0.04 eV between two
oxygen positions.76 Thus, oxygen di?usion can follow three
di?erent pathways (from O1 to O1, O2 to O2, or O1 to O2).
Calculations indicate that the di?usion from O1 to O2 gives
the lowest enthalpy. The calculated bond distances and lattice
parameters that allowed the orthorhombic structure to be
reproduced were found to be in a good agreement with
experimental values. In another study, DFT+U showed similar
pathways for the O1?O1 and O2?O2 and a di?erent pathway
was obtained for the O1?O2.77
The process of calculating the migration barriers and
vacancy formation energies for all possible perovskite-type
structure compounds is very cumbersome (Figure 7)86 and
time-consuming. The high magnetization of Fe ions and
antiferromagnetic structure of LaFeO3 make it challenging for
DFT calculations. Recent studies include Hubbard U
corrections which utilize optimized U parameters against
experimentally measured lattice parameters and magnet-
ization.84,85,91 Comparing vacancy formation energies or
migration barriers in one compound using di?erent computa-
tional methods can lead to great discrepancies, and limited
information is inferred. However, using the computational
methods, trends can be derived and could be related to the
experimental study.
The stability of lanthanum-based perovskites with di?erent
doping ratios shows a relationship between vacancy formation
energy and bulk formation energy of the compound.92 Su and
Sun investigated the formation energy of oxygen vacancies and
found a linear relationship between the bulk formation energy
and the formation energy of oxygen vacancies in ABO3 (A = La
and/or Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba; B = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and
Ni).94 This indicates that the vacancy formation energy rises
inversely proportionally linear with the formation energy of the
bulk. To con?rm the linear relationship, they repeated their
calculations on LaFe0.5M0.5O3, and they found a similar slope
and intercept values.
An extensive study on LaMO3 (M = Sc?Cu) perovskites
using a di?erent DFT indicates a relationship with the
migration of oxygen along the periodic table.77 This study
shows that LaFeO3 is an exception within this series with a
higher vacancy formation energy than expected from
experimental studies (Figure 8). This discrepancy originates
from having a signi?cantly lower exchange stabilization energy
upon reduction of Fe, as the additional electron takes an
antiparallel spin as all ?ve d-orbitals are occupied by a single
electron. DFT+U calculated vacancy formation energies are in
good agreement with the experimental results. The observed
trend of the oxygen migration barrier can be described by the
oxygen vacancy formation energy, as a descriptor. The e?ect of
macropores in LaFeO3 as an oxygen carrier for chemical-
looping reforming of methane was examined by Zheng et al.93
This process allows the production of H2 and CO with a
H2:CO ratio of 2. The authors suggest that the coexistence of
Ce4+?Ce3+ and Fe3+?Fe4+ couples on the interface of LaFeO3
and CeO2 provides many oxygen vacancies as active sites for
methane adsorption and activation (Figure 9).
by H2, LaFeO3 and LaMnO3 are more stable under the
reducing condition at temperatures greater than 300 °C.99
EXAFS/XANES studies con?rmed the trivalent oxidation state
of B-site cations after treatment under H2, while the CO yield
was reported as 22.8% for LaFeO3 at 320 °C and 8.3% for
LaMnO3 at 380 °C.
An electrochemical study on La0.8Sr0.2CuO4 showed the
formation of methanol, ethanol, and propanol with a faradic
e?ciency of up to 40% with a current density of 180 A/cm2.100
In optimizing the catalytic activity, two main strategies have
been carried out: (i) elemental doping and (ii) structural
modi?cation. Hu et al. studied La0.8A0.2FeO3?? (A = Ca, Sr,
and Ba) perovskites as cathodes for CO2 reduction.8 Doping
with alkaline earth elements decreases the average valence
states of Fe, facilitating electron transfer in the reduction of
CO2 via the surface reaction 3. A 20% Sr-doping was found to
be the optimal composition for the promotion of CO2
reduction.
CO2 + 2Fe?Fe + V·O· ? CO + 2Fe×Fe + O×O
In order to further advance the development of novel
catalysts for the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), a detailed
understanding of the reaction mechanisms at the cathode
LaFeO3?? is crucial. Yang et al. investigated the mechanism of
CO2RR on LSF through Raman spectroscopy.7 Their ?ndings
were corroborated by density functional theory (DFT)
calculations, which revealed the lowest energy pathway for
the CO2RR was through a carbonate species (Figure 10).7 This
carbonate species then goes through a decomposition to form
CO (rate-determining step) followed by the subsequent
desorption of CO. The proposed mechanism can be written
as follows:7
Opitz et al. investigated the surface reactions occurring on
La0.6Sr0.4FeO3?? and (La,Sr)(Cr,Ni)O3?? thin ?lms by means
of in operando near-ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (NAP-XPS).101 Under cathodic polarization
conditions, CO2 is activated through the formation of a
carbonate species. The carbonate species was found to form
through the adsorption of CO2 on an oxygen vacant site
followed by an electron transfer step (Figure 10). These
mechanisms suggest that perovskites with both high electron
concentrations and oxygen vacancy concentrations are well
suited for CO2RR. The presence of oxygen vacancies in
perovskite-type materials has been shown to not only favor this
ion conduction but provide a site of adsorption for
intermediates such as CO2.
Main Approaches for Electrochemical Performance
Enhancement. From a thermodynamic point of view, it is
more pro?table to run SOECs at a high temperature due to a
lower electrical energy demand, decreased reaction over
potential, and faster oxygen ion di?usion.102,103 In practice,
high operation temperatures not only limit the range of
materials that can be used for cell production but also increase
the costs of cell manufacturing and operation. High temper-
ature operation dramatically enhances the material degradation
by H2, LaFeO3 and LaMnO3 are more stable under the
reducing condition at temperatures greater than 300 °C.99
EXAFS/XANES studies con?rmed the trivalent oxidation state
of B-site cations after treatment under H2, while the CO yield
was reported as 22.8% for LaFeO3 at 320 °C and 8.3% for
LaMnO3 at 380 °C.
An electrochemical study on La0.8Sr0.2CuO4 showed the
formation of methanol, ethanol, and propanol with a faradic
e?ciency of up to 40% with a current density of 180 A/cm2.100
In optimizing the catalytic activity, two main strategies have
been carried out: (i) elemental doping and (ii) structural
modi?cation. Hu et al. studied La0.8A0.2FeO3?? (A = Ca, Sr,
and Ba) perovskites as cathodes for CO2 reduction.8 Doping
with alkaline earth elements decreases the average valence
states of Fe, facilitating electron transfer in the reduction of
CO2 via the surface reaction 3. A 20% Sr-doping was found to
be the optimal composition for the promotion of CO2
reduction.
CO2 + 2Fe?Fe + V·O· ? CO + 2Fe×Fe + O×O
In order to further advance the development of novel
catalysts for the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), a detailed
understanding of the reaction mechanisms at the cathode
LaFeO3?? is crucial. Yang et al. investigated the mechanism of
CO2RR on LSF through Raman spectroscopy.7 Their ?ndings
were corroborated by density functional theory (DFT)
calculations, which revealed the lowest energy pathway for
the CO2RR was through a carbonate species (Figure 10).7 This
carbonate species then goes through a decomposition to form
CO (rate-determining step) followed by the subsequent
desorption of CO. The proposed mechanism can be written
as follows:7
Opitz et al. investigated the surface reactions occurring on
La0.6Sr0.4FeO3?? and (La,Sr)(Cr,Ni)O3?? thin ?lms by means
of in operando near-ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (NAP-XPS).101 Under cathodic polarization
conditions, CO2 is activated through the formation of a
carbonate species. The carbonate species was found to form
through the adsorption of CO2 on an oxygen vacant site
followed by an electron transfer step (Figure 10). These
mechanisms suggest that perovskites with both high electron
concentrations and oxygen vacancy concentrations are well
suited for CO2RR. The presence of oxygen vacancies in
perovskite-type materials has been shown to not only favor this
ion conduction but provide a site of adsorption for
intermediates such as CO2.
Main Approaches for Electrochemical Performance
Enhancement. From a thermodynamic point of view, it is
more pro?table to run SOECs at a high temperature due to a
lower electrical energy demand, decreased reaction over
potential, and faster oxygen ion di?usion.102,103 In practice,
high operation temperatures not only limit the range of
materials that can be used for cell production but also increase
the costs of cell manufacturing and operation. High temper-
ature operation dramatically enhances the material degradation
the thermal expansion coe?cient match between the catalyst
and the electrolyte decreases, which may lead to quick cell
degradation. To avoid this issue, a multilayered structure was
proposed, which can be written as L80-C20/L50-C50/L20-
C80|CoCGO|L20-C80/L50-C50/L80-C20. For such a case
the resistance was as low as 0.067 Ohm·cm2. The cell
degradation for that condition was found to be about 2.9%
after 600 h of operation.
In?ltration Method. The second approach of producing a
composite electrode is the precursor in?ltration method. In
this case, cation containing salts, predominantly nitrates, are
mixed together with surfactants, chelating, and complexing
agents to form a polymeric precursor solution.113,114 This
solution is then in?ltrated inside the porous structures and
sintered after to form the desired phase and structure (Figure
12). Even though this approach is much more costly and time-
consuming, it allows control of the catalyst particle size as well
as backbone coverage, so materials with precisely controlled
structures and extremely high activity can be produced. The
in?uence of surfactants and chelating agents on the composite
structure properties was shown by Burye and Nicholas.115 It
was demonstrated that the prein?ltration of GDC nano-
particles decreases the average size of LSCF, which is
subsequently in?ltrated by a nitrate solution containing a
chelating agent (citric acid) or a surfactant (Triton X-100). On
the contrary, the average particle size is not observed to
decrease when LSCF was in?ltrated from a nitrate solution
without any additives (Figure 13). Symmetrical cells with
Triton X-100-derived LSCF?GDC cathodes in air have shown
a polarization resistance of 0.17 Ohm·cm2 at 540 °C, while a
value of 0.37 Ohm·cm2 was obtained for the cathode prepared
without any additives. In addition, a much slower degradation
rate was observed for systems that utilize either a chelating
agent or a surfactant.
Nanoparticles Ex-solution as a New Promising
Approach of Catalytic Activity Enhancement. The
development of materials with nanoparticles distributed on
the carrier surfaces is a well-known approach to produce highly
active catalysts in many ?elds of application. In most of the
cases, such nanoparticles are introduced through common
deposition methods, such as physical deposition or in?ltra-
tion.116 Even though these approaches are widely used, they
only provide limited control over the size of the nanoparticles,
distribution, and anchorage of the synthesized species.117 In
addition, nanoparticles obtained in such a way tend to
segregate, which leads to drop in catalyst activity.118
An ex-solution method to deposit nanoparticles on the
materials surface is to grow them directly on the surface in the
reducing atmosphere at elevated temperatures. This technique
was exhaustively explored by Neagu et al.119 It was shown that
nanosize particles, including metals, oxides, and their
combinations, can be obtained in a controlled way through
deviations from ideal ABO3 backbone stoichiometry. Through
initial composition variation, particle distribution and particle
size can be precisely controlled. It was also shown that even the
particles in nanoproximity with respect to each other remained
stable even after prolonged heat treatments. It suggests that the
particles are ?rmly anchored on the surface, in contrast to
particles obtained by a simple deposition. It was also shown
that the nanoparticle ex-solution in electrochemical cells can be
reached by the application of an electrical potential.120
Speci?cally, metallic nanoparticles of size 30?100 nm were
obtained from La0.43Ca0.37Ni0.06Ti0.94O3 (LCTNi) and
in a carbon dioxide environment at the reduction potential
over 2 V. As can be seen in Figure 14, such cells have shown
high electrochemical activity for both H2 evolution and
CO2RR.
Liu et al. have shown that Fe?Ni nanoparticles were
produced from La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3?? (LSFN) as a perovskite
backbone in a reducing atmosphere at 850 °C.121 The XRD
results have shown that the chemical composition of the
obtained nanoparticles is Fe0.64Ni0.36. In addition, some La2O3
was formed, which is undesirable due to its low activity.
Nevertheless, high electrochemical activity for CO2RR was
obtained as low as 0.272 Ohm·cm2 at OCV in a 70:30 CO2
and CO mixture at 850 °C. The stability test over 100 h in the
same conditions at 0.6 V (vs OCV) did not show any
signi?cant degradation or coke presence. Ding et al.122 tested
La0.6Ca0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3 (LCFN)?SDC composites obtained via
both in?ltration and mechanical mixing with further nano-
particles ex-solution. The presence of both bimetallic Fe?Ni
particles with the size of 10?20 nm and GDC nanoparticles
with the size around 0.45 ?m was con?rmed by both X-ray
di?raction and scanning electron microscopy (Figure 15).
Electrochemical tests in the fuel cell mode have shown that the
combination of Fe?Ni and GDC nanoparticles has led to
synergistical promotion of both H2 oxidation and O2 reduction
reactions. Both mechanically mixed and in?ltrated electrodes
have shown high stability for repeated hydrogen?air cycles
(Figure 16). The highest initial power density of 303 mW·cm2
A similar study was conducted by Yu et al. for LSCF
heteroepitaxial thin ?lms.128 In this research, perovskite thin
?lms with a varied Sr content were produced by pulsed layer
deposition on di?erent single-crystal substrates to obtain
di?erent levels of strain inside the ?lm. Strontium segregation
was estimated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and total-
re?ection X-ray ?uorescence. The electronic structure of the
Sr-enriched phases was described by hard X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy. It has been shown that adding more strontium to
the perovskite lattice leads to higher quantities of strontium
segregation (Figure 17). It was found that the formation rate of
the Sr-rich phase is in?uenced by lattice strain, which can be
introduced by heteroepitaxial growth and can modify the
di?usivity of Sr cations within the lattice. The use of high-
resolution X-ray di?raction methods revealed that surface
segregation is increased with tensile strain and reduced with
the comprehensive strain present in the ?lm. A mathematical
model was also developed to correlate the Sr segregation with
the relative strain and Sr content within the perovskite phase.
The surface segregation increased linearly with the quantity of
Sr in the lattice when the relative strain was kept constant.
Similarly, the segregation was also increased monotonically
with an increase in relative strain when the quantity of Sr was
held constant.130
Another factor that can dramatically decrease the activity of
Sr-containing perovskite catalysts is Cr poisoning.129?131 The
most common source of Cr in the cells is the metallic alloys
that are used as cell interconnects. Cr might also be introduced
by some of the supporting equipment, such as heat exchangers,
tubing, and so on. Usually poisoning is caused by the reduction
of Cr(VI) species to solid chromium particles, which can
deposit on the catalyst surface.132 It has been proposed that
this reduction is due to a kinetically controlled chemical
reaction between gaseous Cr(VI) species and the Sr-rich
segregated phases. The most common impurity phases that
have been observed include SrCrO4 and Cr2O3. Large (up to 6
?m) SrCrO4 deposits can form and block pores in the catalyst.
This is a problem because this phase has a low electrical
conductivity and low catalytic activity.
The alternative degradation mechanism has been predicted
by Ni et al.133 who observed that higher degradation was
achieved for surfaces with homogeneous Cr distribution and
low deposited Cr. This is in the contrast to the electrodes
which have low Cr contents in the bulk and large amounts of
chromium surface deposits.134 The degradation due to Cr
cathode was investigated in a symmetrical cell mode. EIS data
analysis (Figures 18 and 19) have clearly shown that with
overall Cr content about 2.7 atom % k0 and D0 dropped by 1?
2 orders of magnitude. Even at a high poisoning level, focused
ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) tomog-
raphy did not show any signi?cant changes at the micrometer
scale. On the contrary, the incorporation of chromium was
clearly seen at the nanoscale level (Figure 20). In addition, the
Fe?Co spinel formation was readily increased by Cr poisoning,
which might be a consequence of partial B-site cation
substitution with chromium. Also, initial evidence of Cr
segregation along LSCF grain boundaries was presented, which
is associated with a Co de?ciency. The methods developed in
the presented study provided several new ways to examine the
degradation mechanism in SOEC/SOFCs that can be used for
testing the stability of new materials operating under real
conditions.
Another important issue is that many abundant perovskite
structures are not chemically compactable with the conven-
tional yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) electrolyte. Sr-containing
perovskites, such as LSCF, in contact with YSZ at operation
temperatures, form highly resistive La2Zr2O7 and SrZrO3.62 In
order to overcome this issue, Uchida et al. have introduced an
SDC bu?er layer between the YSZ electrolyte and the
perovskite catalyst.135 In this case, the porosity of the barrier
layer determines the cell performance.136 In addition, less
formed due to YSZ and GDC/SDC interdi?usion.137 Matsui et
al. have described microstructural changes of the LSCF/SDC/
YSZ system upon long exposure times with constant current
density at 1000 °C.136 Before the exposure, SEM showed that
only the solid solution between SDC and YSZ had formed.
After 100 h of exposure time, the structure became more
complicated due to SrZrO3 phase formation, which was
con?rmed by EDS. With an increase in the time exposed, the
amount of SrZrO3 increased. It was noted that the new phase
formation occurs only at the SDC/YSZ interface and only
inside the pores, so it was suggested that the formation of
SrZrO3 is attributed to Sr di?usion to the SDC/YSZ interface.
The EIS test results con?rmed that resistance of the cell was
increased, which can be attributed to the formation of a
secondary phase with low electrical conductivity. It was also
noticed that, after 400 h of exposure, LSCF and the SDC layer
agglomeration occurred.
While the LSCF phase agglomeration occurs only due to
particle coarsening, the SDC layer sintering can be enhanced
due to Co and Fe inclusion e?ects, as they may serve as
sintering agents. It was also noticed that microstructural
changes were accelerated along with an increase in the
cathodic current density, which may be attributed to an
increase in the driving force for the formation of SrZrO3. This
is accompanied by the change in the chemical potential
distribution of Sr and Zr in each constituent layer due to an
oxygen partial pressure drop.138 The TEM analysis of the
SDC/YSZ interface was conducted to detect elemental
di?usion. After the 400 h of exposure time, YSZ, SrZrO3,
and the SDC-YSZ solid solution and a Sm-rich YSZ-SDC solid
solution phases were detected. It was noted that the electrical
conductivity of the cell is low, which may also lead to
performance deterioration. Therefore, it can be concluded that
the cell degradation is caused by a combination of degradation
factors, including LSCF and SDC agglomeration; triple-phase-
boundary length reduction; SrZrO3 formation; and a ceria-
zirconia solid solution formation.
The formation of syngas by high temperature electrolysis needs
a mixture of H2O and CO2 supplied to the cathodes surface.139
As SOECs are a sustainable technology, a variety of di?erent
potential fuels have been considered. Each fuel has the
potential to introduce di?erent impurities that will vary
depending on the fuel’s initial composition, for instance, sulfur
impurities, which are common for fossil fuels and biogas which
could produce sulfur dioxide or hydrogen sul?de during the
operation. H2S is being widely reported as an activity inhibitor
for Ni-YSZ cermet anodes in SOFC due to Ni surface
poisoning.140,141 Several MIECs appeared to be sulfur
tolerant142?144 and were exhaustively discussed by Gong et
al.;145 in some cases, they also enhance the electrochemical
activity.146
Addo et al. tested the performance of La0.3M0.7Fe0.7Cr0.3O3??
(M = Sr, Ca) as the full cell anodes in the presence of 9 ppm of
H2S at 800 °C.147 In the presence of H2S, the polarization
resistance dropped and was 4% smaller rather than in the initial
gas composition (wet H2:N2 = 30:70). It was suggested that
some adsorbed species like FeS might have formed, although
no additional experiments were conducted to support this
argument. Wenyi et al. have shown that perovskite structured
material can be inactivated by the presence of H2S.148
La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3??(LSCM55) was tested as a potential
material for the oxidation of H2S in N2?H2S (5%). The
possible electrochemical reactions can be written as
H2S + O2? ? S + H2O + 2e?
In addition to electrochemical oxidation, it was proven that
some chemical reactions take place on the surface with sulfur
species involved. LSCM55 samples were heat threated at 800
°C in di?erent atmospheres: (i) in 99.9% H2; (ii) in 5% N2?
H2S; and (iii) in 99.9% hydrogen switching to N2?H2S. XPS
analysis presented on Figure 21 has shown that the dominating
form of sulfur on the anode surface is sulfate (S6+). In addition,
XPS analysis of the O 1s region proved that lattice oxygen is
predominantly used to form sulfate species. Moreover, the
amount of sulfate formed decreases by reducing the oxygen
content. This agrees with a study conducted by Wang et al.
where they investigated the LSCF cathode performance in
electrolysis mode for a half cell with dry air on the anode and
dry air + 1 ppm of SO2 on the cathode side.149 The sulfate
phase was found to be formed predominantly on electro-
chemically active sites, i.e., on the vacancies. The mechanism of
sulfate formation was suggested as follows. SO2 gas is adsorbed
on the oxygen vacancy site. Then the gas molecule reacts with
the lattice oxygen to form the SO42? ion. Thus, by reducing the
lattice oxygen concentration that process becomes unfavorable.
Cathode: 2 O2 + 2e? ? O2?
In any case, strontium sulfate formation leads to a performance
decrease, which may be attributed to the active site blocking
due to Sr surface segregation. The same activity drop of LSCF
was reported by Xie et al.150 In addition, it was shown that the
electrical conductivity of this material is also decreased by
sulfur poisoning.
Another class of common impurities include the nitrogen
oxides (NOx) that usually form when fossil fuels are burned at
elevated temperature. As NOx severely contributes to the
formation of smog and acid rain, some e?orts were attempted
to convert them to nitrogen in the SOC with a perovskite
catalyst, such as LSM.59,151?153 None of these studies found
anything to report regarding perovskite catalyst degradation.
Another group of possible impurities includes the halogen-
containing compounds. Predominantly, ?ue gas contains
hydrogen chloride and hydrogen ?uoride. To our best of
knowledge, a few groups have tested the in?uence of ?ue gases
with MIEC catalysts in SOCs. Li et al. has shown during a 1 h
test that no degradation was achieved in a hydrogen fuel cell
with a HCl concentration of 8 ppm at 850 °C and 10 ppm at
750 °C.154 Trembly et al. reported a 17.4% loss of anode
performance at 800 °C when a 20 ppm of HCl concentration
was utilized.157 The reaction between Ni and HCl to form
NiCl2 was suggested.155 Hence, even low concentrations of
HCl can signi?cantly reduce the performance of the MIEC
electrodes when metal nanoparticles are present on the surface.
In addition, hydrogen halides are highly corrosive, especially at
high temperatures. This may cause degradation of the metallic
components of the supporting equipment and current
collectors as well as ceramic materials that are used for
sealing.156,157
Aromatic hydrocarbons have been found to easily form coke
on the catalyst active sites, which causes a drastic drop in the
activity. This is likely caused by a slow reaction rate due to the
presence of strong C?C bonds.158 This was proven by many
researchers studying cermets, such as Ni-YSZ or Cu-
CeO2.159?161 Nevertheless, this coke formation is predom-
inantly reversible and can be removed after pure fuel is
supplied.159,161 Lee et al. reported that during the diesel
reforming reactions on the perovskite catalyst with composi-
formation can be observed.158 It was proposed that the
catalytic reaction is inhibited due to the occupation of active
sites by carbon deposits. As coke formation is observed for
both perovskite structured materials without cell polarization
and a cermet catalyst, the same behavior could be expected for
LaFeO3 derived materials. There are many other compounds
that can potentially be present in trace amounts such as AsH3,
H2Se, PH3, Sb, Hg, Cd, and Pb in the SOC feedstocks.162 Even
though the quantity of these impurities is much smaller, their
in?uence on the SOC performance is currently unknown and
needs to be deeply investigated.
In summary, LaFeO3-based materials have the potential to
replace cermet materials as electrodes in SOCs due to their
high catalytic activity. Here, we reviewed the following key
points about this material and its application in SOECs.
• Lanthanum ferrite-based materials crystallize in three
distinct crystal structures based on temperature and
composition, the orthorhombic phase is dominant at low
temperatures and in low A-site doping systems, the
rhombohedral phase evolves at higher temperatures or
with heavily doped systems, and a cubic phase is usually
only seen at high temperatures. The rhombohedral
phase seems to be the preferred crystal structure due to
LaFeO3 catalytic activity at ?800 °C.
The oxygen di?usion pathways in LaFeO3 are important
for understanding how the structure changes at the local
scale when the material is operating as a catalyst at high
temperatures. Several possible pathways have been
computationally proposed using DFT studies.
• The catalytic performance of these materials could be
improved by making composites or nanoparticle ex-
solution techniques. Both techniques have shown
promise to improve the catalytic performance along
with lowering the cost and making more durable cells.
Lanthanum ferrite-based materials have some disadvan-
tages such as poisoning by impurities in the feed gas.
Several studies have shown that properties of LaFeO3
materials can be disrupted by H2S, NOx, and coking.
This means that these materials may only be used with
selective feed gas varieties or the cells need to be
engineering to protect against these impurities.
As the ?eld of SOECs develops, the usage of LaFeO3 based
materials will give us a better understanding of the material
requirements necessary to improve catalyst performance. So, a
good understanding of the LaFeO3 structure, di?usion
pathways, and chemical stability are essential for further
advancement of this technology.
orcid.org/0000-0001-6256-6307; Email: vthangad@
ucalgary.ca
Santiago Jimenez-Villegas ? Department of Chemistry,
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.1c00771
This article was written by graduate students for a class titled
“CHEM 689.6 - Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry - Solid
State Electrochemistry” o?ered by Dr. Venkataraman Thanga-
durai at the University of Calgary, Department of Chemistry in
winter 2020. V.T. planned the review paper idea and
mentored. B.Z. contributed to structural aspects, C.C. and
S.J.V. contributed to the theoretical aspects, and M.P. wrote
the electrochemistry and application aspects. All authors
approved the paper.
The authors declare no competing ?nancial interest.
The authors would like to thank Dr. Samira Siahrostami,
University of Calgary, for a critical reading of this paper.
