Title:
Classics in Chemical Neuroscience: Amitriptyline

Abstract:
 Amitriptyline was the second tricyclic antidepressant to appear on the market for major depressive disorder under the brand name Elavil in 1961. Since its emergence, amitriptyline has been an e?ective therapeutic in various disease states and disorders but has also been a concerning source of cardiotoxicity. Amitriptyline inhibits serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake as well as produces o?-target activity at histaminergic, muscarinic, and various other receptors. Its role as a modulator of monoamines helped further establish the monoamine theory to understand various mood disorders, paving the way for the now more common selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. In this review, we will discuss amitriptyline’s synthesis, manufacturing information, drug metabolism, pharmacology, adverse e?ects, and its history and importance in therapy to present amitriptyline as a true classic in chemical neuroscience. 
----------------------


Text:
----------------------
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a psychiatric condition
that a?ects mood and cognition. It presents mainly as
increased feelings of negativity and a generalized decrease in
satisfaction from previously enjoyed activities that causes
signi?cant impairment in daily life.1?3 With severity ranging
from mild to severe, MDD’s diagnosis is based on a collection
of various symptoms that occur for at least 2 weeks. These
include lethargy, appetite changes, suicidal ideation, among
many other symptoms deleterious to one’s mood.1,2 MDD
occurs in approximately 1 in 5 adults throughout their lifetime
[onset time, mean (SE) = 29 years (0.21)]. Females are more
likely to be diagnosed with MDD than males, and
approximately half of those diagnosed with MDD also present
with substance-abuse disorders. Comorbidity with anxiety
disorders or personality disorders occurs in roughly a third of
those a?ected by MDD.4?8
In 1959, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) emerged with
imipramine (1, Figure 1), which provided a new pharmaceut-
ical class for treating MDD.9 The following year, imipramine’s
diamine structure was substituted with an alkene at the central
amine to create amitriptyline (2). Amitriptyline was approved
for the treatment of MDD in 1961 by the United States Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) under the brand name
Elavil.10
Amitriptyline is included in the World Health Organization’s
List of Essential Medicines of 2019, providing a broad
medicinal pro?le with a long list of o?-label indications,
despite only being FDA-approved for MDD.11,12
Current treatments vary (cognitive behavioral therapy,
pharmaceuticals, classical psychedelics, etc.), but it was not
until the latter half of the 20th century that some of the
pharmacological underpinnings of MDD became more
apparent.13,14 The historical signi?cance of antidepressants,
speci?cally amitriptyline’s impact, will be explored more
thoroughly in History and Importance in Neuroscience.
In this review, we will organize available information on
amitriptyline’s synthesis, drug metabolism, pharmacology, and
importance for neuroscience. We also will present data from
manufacturing and sales. Whereas there are other resour-
ces15?19 for an overview of amitriptyline, the goal of this review
is to compile relevant, up-to-date data into one easily accessible
format in order to demonstrate amitriptyline’s presence as a
classic of chemical neuroscience.
Amitriptyline (CAS no. 50-48-6) [3-(10,11-dihydro-5H-
dibenzo[a,d][7]annulen-5-ylidene)-N,N-dimethylpropan-1-
amine] [C20H23N] is a small (MW = 277.41 Da) tertiary
amine tricyclic antidepressant with no hydrogen bond donors
and a single hydrogen bond acceptor.19
The original patent literature shows two main routes for the
synthesis of amitriptyline (2) starting from dibenzosuberone
(4) as shown in Scheme 1. The ?rst synthesis of 2 commences
with 4 undergoing a reaction with the Grignard reagent (5)
derived from dimethylaminopropyl chloride to yield the
tertiary alcohol (6).20 Compound 6 is then dehydrated to
amitriptyline (2) using acidic conditions.21
An alternative synthesis was also reported in which 4
undergoes a reaction with the Grignard reagent (7) derived
from cyclopropyl bromide to yield the tertiary alcohol (8).22
Compound 8 then quantitatively rearranges to the primary
chloride (9) upon treatment with a solution of hydrogen
chloride in acetic acid. Ultimately, 2 is obtained from 9 by
reaction with dimethylamine in a sealed tube.
Amitriptyline is currently only available to the public as a
generic hydrochloride salt; brand names have included Elavil
(originally manufactured by AstraZeneca), Endep (manufac-
tured by Roche), Amitril (manufactured by WL/PD), and
Saroten (manufactured by Warner).23 The FDA discontinued
each of these amitriptyline brand names (and many others
containing amitriptyline) in the early 2000s due to cardiotoxic
concerns,24 although in 2017 the agency issued a notice stating
that the Elavil tablets were discontinued for reasons not
previously stated. Under pressure from a citizen petition ?led
by Alembic Pharmaceuticals Limited, the FDA reviewed
agency records and concluded that “the petitioner has
identi?ed no data or other information suggesting that these
products were withdrawn for reasons of safety or e?ective-
ness”.25
Pharmaceutical manufacturers now are able to apply for
abbreviated new drug applications with formulations contain-
ing amitriptyline hydrochloride.25 However, cardiotoxicity
remains a well-established concern as discussed in Pharmacol-
ogy, Adverse E?ects, and Dosages.
Amitriptyline can also be prescribed as a combination
therapy tablet with chlordiazepoxide (a benzodiazepine) or
perphenazine (an antipsychotic), both produced by Mylan
Pharmaceuticals Inc.23 It currently is commercially available as
a tablet in combination therapy as a hydrochloride salt to aid in
its absorption, but when injected intramuscularly in a hospital
setting, the compound is usually presented as an embonate
(pamoate) salt.26
In 2016 amitriptyline was the 88th most prescribed
medication in the United States, with over 8.6 million
prescriptions and total patient out-of-pocket costs exceeding
$60 million.27 Average wholesale costs per unit for generic
amitriptyline hydrochloride sold in 100-tablet bottles are
estimated in Table 1 as of November 2020.28 Prescription
Table 1. Amitriptyline Unit Prices
prices must be a?ordable in order to e?ectively treat a disorder
that does not di?erentiate based on socioeconomic status.
Amitriptyline’s price typically does not serve as a barrier for
treatment.
Amitriptyline is readily absorbed in the GI tract, resulting in an
initial bioavailability of 90?95%, decreasing to a mean
bioavailability of 53% after ?rst pass metabolism (F = 0.527
± 0.123).11,29 The main hepatic metabolizing enzymes of
clinical signi?cance for amitriptyline are CYP2C19 and
CYP2D6. CYP2C19 is the primary enzyme responsible for
demethylation of amitriptyline into its main metabolite
nortriptyline (3), which has a similar pharmacological pro?le,
and then 3 is demethylated to yield demethylnortriptyline (10,
Figure 2). CYP2D6 contributes to the hydroxylation of
nortriptyline (3) to its most common metabolites, (Z)-10-
hydroxynortriptyline (11) and (E)-10-hydroxynortriptyline
(12), with the (E)-enantiomer produced at approximately 5
times the amount of the (Z)-enantiomer. The hydroxynor-
triptyline metabolites are nontherapeutic and have been
associated with amitriptyline’s cardiotoxicity.30,31
Though CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 are the most common
P450 enzymes related to amitriptyline’s metabolism, poly-
morphisms of these enzymes are not predictive of any one
speci?c adverse event. Pharmacogenomic testing can help to
explain di?erences in amitriptyline’s e?cacy among MDD
patients, however.31 It is recommended to avoid prescribing
amitriptyline for patients who are CYP2D6 ultrarapid or poor
metabolizers due to decreased e?cacy or a general increase in
toxic side e?ects, respectively.32
Of clinical importance, monitoring plasma levels of the
hydroxy metabolites of both amitriptyline and nortriptyline has
predictive value in clinical outcomes of inpatients su?ering
from MDD. An increase in 11 and (Z)-10-hydroxyamitripty-
line (13) plasma concentrations helps predict positive
psychiatric outcomes based on a global assessment of
functioning (GAF) test utilizing DSM-III clinical outcomes
from 1997. Additionally, an increase in 12 and (E)-10-
hydroxyamitriptyline (14) metabolites is associated with
negative outcomes based on the same measures.33 However,
because of updated diagnostic and clinical presentations within
the DSM-V, these ?ndings may not be entirely sound within a
modern psychological perspective.
Even still, pharmacogenetic testing of MDD patients could
be used to identify those that could gain the most bene?t from
this medication and/or those more prone to adverse events
from amitriptyline. This would not only decrease su?ering for
the patient but also decrease the likelihood of unnecessary
prescriptions.34,35
Tricyclic antidepressants appear to relieve depressive symp-
toms primarily through regulation of monoamines, speci?cally
serotonin and norepinephrine. Amitriptyline inhibits serotonin
and norepinephrine reuptake, though its primary metabolite,
nortriptyline, is a more potent inhibitor of norepinephrine
reuptake than serotonin. Amitriptyline inhibits the serotonin
reuptake transporter (SERT, Ki = 3?4 nM) and the
norepinephrine reuptake transporter (NET, Ki = 19?35 nM)
(Table 2). Amitriptyline also has a relatively high a?nity for 5-
HT2c and ?1 (Ki = 4.0 and 4.4 nM, respectively). All
metabolites of amitriptyline are less anticholinergic than
amitriptyline itself, though the 10-hydroxy metabolites (11,
12, 13, 14) are equipotent to amitriptyline in inhibiting
norepinephrine reuptake.36 These neurotransmitters and
respective receptors have been implicated in the symptomatol-
ogy of MDD in many reviews.3,10,36?38
Monoamine regulation does not present the whole
therapeutic picture, however. Growing evidence suggests
depression symptomatology is very polygenic. Neurotrophic
dysfunction and neuroimmune dysfunction appear to be
prominent possible causes as well.42,43 Brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor (BDNF) is a key player for the neurotrophic
hypothesis, promoting synaptogenesis and general neuro-
development.43,44
Many antidepressants have been found to increase BDNF
within certain areas of the brain; amitriptyline increases BDNF
mRNA expression but only in astrocytic and microglial
cultures.43,45 Though amitriptyline’s e?ect on BDNF does
not appear to act directly on neurons, glial cell dysfunction and
atrophy can still be large contributing factors in MDD
neuropathophysiology.46 Amitriptyline may exert its therapeu-
tic e?ects both through the neurotrophic and through the
monoamine hypotheses for MDD.
Amitriptyline also is prescribed o?-label for patients
experiencing neuropathic pain. This seems in part due to its
common binding site with local anesthetics, acting as a blocker
of sodium channels and disrupting the normal signaling
cascade of action potentials.47 More importantly, amitriptyline
helps to increase the concentration of norepinephrine in the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This norepinephrine reuptake
inhibition increases the basal activity of ?2 receptors, which
mediate an analgesic e?ect by increasing GABA transmission
among spinal interneurons.48 This e?ect from amitriptyline to
treat acute pain from noxious stimuli is small. However,
activation of ?2 receptors via other agents that increase
norepinephrine in the spinal cord has shown pronounced
e?ects in hyperalgesia associated with neuropathic pain.49
Additional o?-label indications include irritable bowel
syndrome, insomnia, and acute psychosis in patients with
schizophrenia. It is also the most widely researched medication
for frequent tension headaches as well as a ?rst-line treatment
for ?bromyalgia.50?55 Though commonly prescribed for
headaches in children, a randomized, placebo-controlled
study showed no signi?cant reduction of headache frequency
or degree of disability associated with migraines in children
and adolescents taking amitriptyline.56
Compared to imipramine (1), amitriptyline contributes to
double the unexpected death rate due to cardiotoxic
complications.57 It is not uncommon for amitriptyline to be
taken in excess in an attempt to self-poison. Unfortunately, the
same medication used to treat a patient’s MDD also can be a
method by which they could intentionally die by suicide.
Amitriptyline accounts for approximately 40% of anti-
depressant overdose fatalities, regardless of antidepressant
class. It consistently has been in the top 20 drugs involved in
overdose deaths in the United States.58,59 Patients presenting
with tricyclic antidepressant overdose (confusion, arrhythmias,
seizures) typically have taken a dose exceeding the minimum
toxic dose (5 mg/kg for amitriptyline) but more commonly in
excess of 20 mg/kg.58 Therapeutic doses are much lower, as
the maximum daily dose is 150 mg regardless of the patient’s
weight. For reference, that maximum daily dose for a 150 lb
patient is 2.2 mg/kg.11
Sudden cardiac death is not uncommon during TCA
overdose. A frequent indicator of tricyclic antidepressant
cardiotoxicity is an elongated QRS wave and QT interval. This
is in part due to the (Z)-10-hydroxynortriptyline (11)
metabolite, as it has been associated speci?cally with these
two presentations of cardiotoxicity in the elderly.60 This
metabolite has also been linked with bradycardia and
decreased cardiac output.61 The elongated intervals can be
narrowed by an intravenous solution of sodium bicarbonate,
and if the patient experiences a seizure, benzodiazepines are
recommended.62
The pathophysiology of amitriptyline’s cardiotoxic e?ects is
not fully understood. However, amitriptyline administration
appears to increase sarcoplasmic reticulum release of calcium
via activation of ryanodine receptors in ventricular myocytes.
This e?ect in combination with amitriptyline’s ability to inhibit
sarcoplasmic reuptake of calcium may contribute to the
cardiotoxic e?ects commonly presented with tricyclic anti-
depressant overdose.63,64
Additionally, the potassium channel encoded by the human
ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) is a commonly screened
binding site for drugs in preclinical development. Compounds
that inactivate this channel are known to elongate the QT
interval, a common presentation of amitriptyline overdose.60,65
Amitriptyline binds to the hERG potassium channel with an
IC50 of 4.78 ± 3.70 ?M in mammalian physiological
conditions.66 It is unclear the extent amitriptyline’s inhibition
of the hERG potassium channel contributes to its mortality.
Though arrhythmias are notable in amitriptyline overdoses,
individuals who die after hospital admittance do so primarily
because of direct suppression of myocardial function, not
arrythmias.67
Less fatal, though serious, adverse e?ects strongly associated
with amitriptyline include anticholinergic e?ects (dry mouth,
slight dizziness), constipation, tachycardia, and confusion.68?70
These are most likely due to the compound’s antagonism of
adrenergic, muscarinic, and histaminergic receptors, contribu-
ting to the side e?ects of dizziness, memory impairments, and
drowsiness, respectively.9
Taking amitriptyline also increases the likelihood of gaining
weight. Patients can experience a heightened desire for
carbohydrates as well as an increase in serum leptin levels,
which can lead to weight gain by increasing caloric intake and
promoting leptin resistance.71?73 While others have not seen
the increase in serum leptin after amitriptyline administration,
the sample size was much smaller in this study.74
Amitriptyline is a potent antihistamine (Ki = 0.5?1.1 nM)
and has a similar binding a?nity for the H1 receptor as many
prescription antihistamines.75?77 This contributes to amitripty-
line’s sedation, but it also may contribute to weight gain.
Histamine modulates the appetite-reducing e?ects of leptin. By
blocking of H1 receptors in the hypothalamus, leptin resistance
develops more rapidly, in turn promoting basal appetite.78
Antihistaminergic compounds have been shown to increase
BMI, waist circumference, and weight.79,80
The e?ect size of weight gain from amitriptyline is relatively
moderate compared to other antidepressants in di?erent
classes on the market.81,82 However, it seems to promote
weight gain more than other TCAs.83 Ultimately, the
mechanism by which amitriptyline increases weight is
comprehensive and multifactorial.
Sexual dysfunction is estimated to occur in 6 times more
males than females who take amitriptyline.84 Sexuality is a
complex and integrated part of one’s identity. As such,
emotional and psychological processes are as important as
physical stimulation. Sexual dysfunction is mediated by
serotonergic systems that interplay with dopaminergic and
noradrenergic signaling in relation to sexual motivation and
satisfaction, in both the peripheral and central nervous
systems.85,86 Amitriptyline’s central and peripheral e?ects on
serotonin are the most likely culprits for inducing sexual
dysfunction.
The initial dosage for outpatient adults with MDD is either
50 mg or 75 mg at their hour of sleep with increasing doses, if
needed, until a maximum of 150 mg daily. Maintenance
dosages are usually between 50 mg and 100 mg daily once the
provider is aware of how the medication a?ects the patient.11
Additionally, the combined plasma concentration of amitripty-
line and nortriptyline signi?cantly correlates to clinical
improvement, as measured through the Hamilton depression
rating scale.87,88 Therapeutic levels of amitriptyline range from
75 to 175 ng/mL, though commonly the combination of
amitriptyline and its metabolite, nortriptyline, is measured with
a broad therapeutic range of 60?220 ng/mL.89?91
Individuals should not take amitriptyline within 2 weeks of
discontinuing a monoamine oxidase-inhibitor (MAO-I) treat-
ment, as a potentially lethal interaction through serotonin
syndrome can occur. To decrease the likelihood of
uncomfortable withdrawal e?ects, patients should avoid
abruptly stopping amitriptyline. For this reason, it is
considered by the FDA to be a class C pregnancy risk since
neonates whose mothers took amitriptyline in the third
trimester can experience withdrawal symptoms.11 Additionally,
the World Health Organization recommends that breastfeed-
ing is compatible with the maximum accepted dose of 150 mg
per day.92
Amitriptyline should not be taken along with alcohol or
other CNS depressants, since it can potentiate their e?ects.
Additionally, those with a history of QT prolongation or other
cardiovascular disorders should not consider amitriptyline as a
treatment for MDD.10,11
MDD has been noted throughout history in various forms,
from empirical literature to art. However, it was not until the
1900s that its scienti?c understanding began to ?ourish. The
role of monoamines, speci?cally serotonin, in MDD became
more clear in the 1960s when a lower concentration of
serotonin in the hind-brain of depressed individuals was
noticed in post-mortem analysis.93 The monoamine hypothesis
for depression helped set the groundwork for current gold-
standard compounds that selectively increase the amount of
serotonin and norepinephrine in synaptic clefts. However, the
?rst class of antidepressants on the market was not developed
out of this insight, as nonselective monoamine oxidase
inhibitors were marketed prior to the understanding of
monoamines’ role in regulating mood.9
The ?rst pharmacological treatment for MDD appeared in
1958 with the production of iproniazid, a MAO-inhibitor,
marketed under the trade name Marsilid. This period was a
very progressive time for psychopharmacology as TCAs
emerged only a year later with the release of imipramine (1)
under the brand name Tofranil.9 This drug’s antidepressant
e?ect was a serendipitous discovery. Chlorpromazine,
structurally very similar to TCAs, was successfully treating
patients with schizophrenia since its launch in 1952 in France.
After structural explorations of chlorpromazine’s pharmaco-
phore, researchers experimented with imipramine to treat
schizophrenia in the late 1950s. It was not e?ective at relieving
psychotic symptoms, but a clinical psychiatrist noted in regard
to his patients’ moods that they “again [seek] contact with
other people ... take part in games, become more cheerful, and
are once again able to laugh...”9
Imipramine provided about the same amount of relief (but
with less dangerous side-e?ects) as the MAOIs, thus the
establishment of a new drug class for treating MDD.
Amitriptyline’s development was not a monumental chemical
synthetic leap from imipramine. The replacement of a tertiary
amine to a carbon was the extent of the modi?cation. Within 2
years, amitriptyline was marketed by AstraZeneca for the
treatment of MDD.10
TCAs are the only class of antidepressants that are not based
on their mechanism of action, primarily due to a limited
understanding of imipramine’s pharmacodynamics at the time
of release. More recent evidence presented in this review
suggests that tricyclics have a broad pharmacological pro?le
beyond their inhibition of amine reuptake transporters, with
strong antihistaminergic and moderate anticholinergic activity.
The disruption of amine reuptake transporters is likely what
predominantly contributes to tricyclics’ antidepressant ef-
fects.37
Currently, selective monoamine reuptake inhibitors, such as
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin
and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), are the ?rst
line of medications considered for MDD due to their e?cacy
and fewer side e?ects, as well as a decreased risk of overdose,
compared to tricyclic and nonselective MAO-inhibitor
alternatives.94 However, MDD inpatients seem to bene?t
more from tricyclics, speci?cally amitriptyline, compared to
SSRIs, because they can be administered 2?3 times the normal
dose in a hospital setting due to the ability to monitor for
serious adverse reactions.95
Developing safe and e?ective antidepressants is relatively
new. Amitriptyline was not the ?rst, and it certainly will not be
the last. However, it highlights a uniquely human motivation:
the drive to maximize the well-being of others. This compound
was a step along the medical progression in treating MDD, one
of the most complex physiological disorders.
Amitriptyline can be an agent of extreme su?ering also, not
only for the patient but for the family of the individual who
used it to facilitate taking their life. Complex challenges, such
as MDD, require powerful and robust solutions. The ability of
any compound to aid in recovery from MDD should be
balanced with its potential to endanger the patient who ingests
it. Nevertheless, pharmacotherapy for psychiatric disorders,
such as MDD, schizophrenia, generalized anxiety disorders,
and many others, continues to strive toward safer compounds
that e?ectively relieve undue su?ering from patients and those
who love them.
As long as there are individuals who are treatment-resistant,
there will be enough motivation to increase their well-being via
new therapeutic mechanisms. Individuals who experience
MDD present clinically in many di?erent ways. Conservative
estimates regarding the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria show 1497
di?erent diagnostic combinations of an MDD episode.96 This
estimate does not consider severity, which can often alter the
course of treatment. Clinicians need a wide range of possible
therapeutics to treat patients with MDD because of the large
variability between individuals. Thankfully, this motivates drug
discovery teams to develop novel mechanistic models
constantly.
New antidepressants are in the pipeline across many
pharmaceutical entities, including NMDA antagonists (esket-
amine), metabotropic glutamate receptor negative allosteric
modulators (mGluR NAMs), and selective inhibitors of MAO-
A, a subtype of monoamine oxidase (moclobemide,
bifemelane).97 Additionally, classical psychedelics, such as
psilocybin, LSD, and DMT, have reached various clinical
milestones for MDD treatments.98?102 Though not novel
compounds, psychedelics can be used in psychedelic assisted
psychotherapy to o?er an e?ective treatment paradigm, one
focused on using one or two doses to dissolve the ego and
integrate the acute psychedelic experience via sober follow-up
sessions with therapists.103?105
Many exciting compounds and nonpharmaceutical therapies
continue to increase in e?cacy and accessibility. Amitripty-
line’s place in pharmaceutical history is still sound in the
context of further developments, and for this reason, it is truly
a classic in chemical neuroscience.
orcid.org/0000-0001-8482-8208; Email: nate.daniels@
lipscomb.edu
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00467
E.W.M. researched all sections and wrote sections I, III, IV, V,
and VI. R.N.D. researched and wrote section III and provided
guidance and mentorship.
The authors declare no competing ?nancial interest.
