Title:
Evidence for CP violation in B + ? Kð892Þ + ?0 from a Dalitz plot analysis

Abstract:

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

The Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) mechanism
[1,2] for quark mixing describes all weak charged current
transitions between quarks in terms of a unitarity matrix
with four parameters: three rotation angles and an
irreducible phase. The unitarity of the CKM matrix is
usually expressed as triangle relationships among its
elements. The interference between tree-level and loop
(“penguin”) amplitudes can give rise to direct CP
violation, which is sensitive to the angles of the
Unitarity Triangle, denoted ?, ?, and ?. Measurements
of the parameters of the CKM matrix provide an impor-
tant test of the Standard Model (SM) since any deviation
from unitarity or discrepancies between measurements of
the same parameter in different decay processes would
imply a possible signature of new physics. Tree ampli-
tudes in B ? K? decays are sensitive to ?, which can be
extracted from interferences between the intermediate
states that populate the K?? Dalitz plane. However, these
amplitudes are Cabibbo-suppressed relative to contribu-
tions carrying a different phase and involving radiation of
either a gluon (QCD penguin) or photon (electroweak
penguin or EWP) from a loop.
QCD penguin contributions can be eliminated by con-
structing a linear combination of the weak decay ampli-
tudes for Bþ ? K? to form a pure isospin I ¼ 32
state [3]:
Since all transitions from I ¼ 12 to I ¼ 32 states occur via
only ?I ¼ 1 operators, A3 is free from QCD contributions.
The weak phase of A3 is often denoted as
where A?3 is the CP conjugate of the amplitude in Eq. (1).
The phase ?3 in Eq. (2) is the CKM angle ? in the absence
of EWP contributions [4].
Measurements of the rates and CP asymmetries in B ?
K? have generated considerable interest because of pos-
sible hints of new-physics contributions [5,6]. Of particular
interest is the difference, ?ACP, between the CP asymme-
try in Bþ ? Kþ?0 and the CP asymmetry in B0 ? Kþ??,
which in the SM is expected to be consistent with zero
within the theoretical uncertainties assuming U-spin sym-
metry and in the absence of color-suppressed tree and
electroweak amplitudes [7,8]. Using the average values of
ACP of Kþ?0 and Kþ?? decays [9], ?ACPðK?Þ is
which differs from zero by 5.5 standard deviations.
Unfortunately, hadronic uncertainties prevent a clear inter-
pretation of these results in terms of the new-physics
implications [3,10]. Additional information can be obtained
through studies of the related vector-pseudoscalar decays
B ? K? and B ? K? [11–13], for which the ratios of
tree-to-penguin amplitudes are expected to be two to three
times larger than for B ? K? decays. Hence, B ? K? and
B ? K? decays could have considerably larger CP
asymmetries.
In this article, we present the results from an amplitude
analysis of Bþ ? K0S?þ?0 decays. The inclusion of charge
conjugate processes is implied throughout this article,
except when referring to CP asymmetries. This is the first
Dalitz plot analysis of this decay by BABAR; the only
previous BABAR analysis of this decay was restricted to
measuring the branching fraction and CP asymmetry of
Bþ ? K0?þ [14]. An upper limit on the branching fraction
for Bþ ? K0?þ?0 was set by the CLEO Collaboration:
BðBþ ? K0?þ?0Þ < 66 × 10?6 [15].
Two contributions to the K0S?þ?0 final state arise
from the resonant decays Bþ ? Kð892Þ0?þ and Bþ ?
Kð892Þþ?0. Although both the rate and CP asymmetries
for Bþ ? Kð892Þ0?þ have been well measured, with
K0 ? Kþ??, by both the BABAR [16] and Belle [17]
Collaborations, the measurements of the rate and CP
statistical uncertainties and could benefit from the addi-
tional information provided by a full amplitude analysis. In
Table I we review the existing measurements of the rates
and CP asymmetries in the B ? Kð892Þ? system.
This article is organized as follows. The isobar model
used to parametrize the complex amplitudes describing the
intermediate resonances contributing to the K0S?þ?0 final
state is presented in Sec. II. A brief description of the
BABAR detector and the data set is given in Sec. III. The
event reconstruction and selection are discussed in detail in
Sec. IV, the background study in Sec. V, and a description
of the extended maximum likelihood fit in Sec. VI.
The results are given in Sec. VII, and a study of the
systematic uncertainties is presented in Sec. VIII. In
Sec. IX, we provide a summary and conclusion, discussing
the results and combining the branching fractions and CP
asymmetries for the decays Bþ ? Kð892Þ0?þ, Bþ ?
K0ð1430Þ0?þ, and Bþ ? Kð892Þþ?0 with previous
BABAR results obtained from the final states Bþ ?
A number of intermediate states contribute to the decay
Bþ ? K0S?þ?0. Their individual contributions are mea-
sured by performing a maximum likelihood fit to the
distribution of events in the Dalitz plot formed from the
two variables, m2K0S?þ and m2?þ?0. We use the Laura++ [24]
software to perform this fit.
The total signal amplitudes for the Bþ and the B? decays
are given in the isobar formalism by [25,26]
where cj is the complex coefficient for a given resonant
decay mode j contributing to the Dalitz plot. This complex
coefficient contains the weak-interaction phase dependence
that is measured relative to one of the contributing resonant
channels. In this article we report results for the relative
phases between each pair of amplitudes.
The function Fj describes the dynamics of the decay
amplitudes and is the product of a resonant line shape (Rj),
two Blatt-Weisskopf barrier factors [27] (XL), and an
angular-dependent term (Tj;L) [28]:
Fj ¼Rj×XLðjp?j;jp?0jÞ×XLðjq?j;jq?0jÞ×Tj;Lðp?;q?Þ; ð6Þ
where L is the orbital angular momentum between the
intermediate resonance and the bachelor particle (the
bachelor particle is the daughter of the B decay that does
not arise from the resonance), q? is the momentum of one of
the daughters of the resonance in the rest frame of the
resonance, p? is the momentum of the bachelor particle in
the rest frame of the resonance, and p?0 and q?0 are the
values of p? and q?, respectively, at the nominal mass
of the resonance. The Blatt-Weisskopf barrier factors are
given by
where z ¼ ðju?jrBWÞ2, z0 ¼ ðju?0jrBWÞ2, u? is either q? or p?,
and rBW ¼ 4.0 ðGeV=cÞ?1 is the meson radius parameter.
The uncertainty in rBW, used for systematic variations, is
2 ðGeV=cÞ?1 for the K resonances, and ranges from
?1.0 to þ2.0 ðGeV=cÞ?1 for the ?ð770Þþ [28]. The angular
term depends on the spin of the resonance and is given by
[29,30]
The choice of which resonance daughter is defined to
carry the momentum q? is a matter of convention. However,
its definition is important when comparing measurements
from different experiments. In Fig. 1, we illustrate the
momentum definitions used for the K0S?þ, K0S?0, and ?þ?0
resonance combinations.
Table II lists the resonances used to model the signal. We
determine a nominal model from data by studying changes
in the log likelihood values for the best fit when omitting or
adding a resonance to the fit model, as described in Sec. VI.
For the Kð892Þ0 and Kð892Þþ resonances, we use a
relativistic Breit-Wigner (RBW) line shape [28]:
where m is the two-body invariant mass and ?ðmÞ is the
mass-dependent width. In general, for a resonance
decaying to spin-0 particles, ?ðmÞ can be expressed as
where m0 and ?0 are the nominal mass and width of the
resonance.
The Gounaris-Sakurai (GS) parametrization [34] is used
to describe the line shape of the ? resonance decaying into
two pions. The parametrization takes the form
1 þ ?0 · d=m0RGj S ¼ m20 ? m2 þ fðmÞ ? im0?ðmÞ ; ð15Þ
where ?ðmÞ is given by Eq. (14). Expressions for fðmÞ, in
terms of ?0 and m, and the constant d can be found in
Ref. [34]. The parameters specifying the ? line shape are
taken from Refs. [31,32], which provides line shape
information derived from fits to eþe? annihilation and ?
lepton decay data.
For the JP ¼ 0þ component of the K? spectrum, denoted
ðK?Þ00=þ, we make use of the LASS parametrization [33],which consists of a K0 resonant term together with an
effective-range, nonresonant component to describe the
slowly increasing phase as a function of the K? mass:
where cot ?B ¼ a1jq?j þ 12 rjq?j. The values used for the scat-
tering length a and the effective range r are given in
Table II. The effective-range component has a cutoff
imposed at 1800 MeV=c2 [16]. Integrating separately the
resonant term, the effective-range term, and the coherent
sum, we find that the resonant terms (hereafter referred to
as the K0ð1430Þ0 and the K0ð1430Þþ) account for 88%
of the sum, and the effective range component 49%; the
37% excess is due to destructive interference between the
two terms. The LASS parametrization is the least well-
determined component of the signal model; we discuss the
impact of these uncertainties in Sec. VIII.
The complex coefficients cj and c?j in Eqs. (4), (5) can be
parametrized in different ways; we follow the parametriza-
tion used in Ref. [16] as it avoids a bias in the measurement
of amplitudes and phases when the resonant components
have small magnitudes:
where xj  ?xj and yj  ?yj are the real and imaginary
parts of the amplitudes. The quantities ?xj and ?yj
parametrize the CP violation in the decay. The CP
asymmetry for a given intermediate state is given by
The results quoted for the resonances in the following
analysis use fit fractions (FFj) as phase-convention-
independent quantities representing the fractional rate of
each contribution in the Dalitz plot. The FF for mode j is
defined as
The sum of all the fit fractions does not necessarily
yield unity due to constructive and destructive interference,
as quantified by the interference fit fractions given
by [30]
The parameters xj, ?xj, yj, and ?yj are determined in
the fit, except for the reference amplitude. Fit fractions,
relative phases, and asymmetries are derived from the fit
parameters and their statistical uncertainties determined
from pseudo experiments generated from the fit results.
The data used in the analysis were collected with the
BABAR detector at the PEP-II asymmetric-energy eþe?
collider at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. The
sample consists of 429 fb?1 of integrated luminosity
recorded at the ?ð4SÞ resonance mass (“on-peak”) and
45 fb?1 collected 40 MeV below the resonance mass (“off-
peak”) [35]. The on-peak sample corresponds to the full
BABAR ?ð4SÞ data set and contains 470.9  2.8 million
BB? events [30]. A detailed description of the BABAR
detector is given in Refs. [36,37]. Charged-particle tracks
are measured by means of a five-layer double-sided silicon
vertex tracker (SVT) and a 40-layer drift chamber (DCH),
both positioned within a solenoid that provides a 1.5 T
magnetic field. Charged-particle identification is achieved
by combining the information from a ring-imaging
Cherenkov detector (DIRC) and specific ionization energy
loss (dE=dx) measurements from the DCH and SVT.
Photons are detected and their energies measured in a
CsI(Tl) electromagnetic calorimeter (EMC). Muon candi-
dates are identified in the instrumented flux return of the
solenoid.
We use GEANT4-based software to simulate the detector
response and account for the varying beam and experi-
mental conditions [38,39]. The EvtGen [40] and Jetset
7.4 [41] software packages are used to generate signal and
background Monte-Carlo (MC) event samples in order to
determine efficiencies and evaluate background contribu-
tions for different selection criteria.
We reconstruct Bþ ? K0S?þ?0 candidates from one ?0
candidate, one K0S candidate reconstructed from a pair of
oppositely charged pions, and a charged pion candidate.
The ?0 candidate is formed from a pair of neutral energy
clusters in the EMC with laboratory energies above
0.05 GeV and lateral moments [42] between 0.01 and
0.6. We require the invariant mass of the reconstructed ?0 to
lie in the range 0.11 < m?? < 0.16 GeV=c2. The K0S
candidate is required to have a ?þ?? invariant mass within
15 MeV=c2 of the K0S mass [28], and a proper decay time
greater than 0.5 × 10?11 s. To reduce combinatorial back-
ground, we also require that the K0S candidates have a
vertex probability greater than 10?6 and that the cosine of
the angle between the K0S momentum direction and the K0S
flight direction (as determined by the interaction point and
the K0S vertex) be greater than 0.995. For the ?þ candidate,
we use information from the tracking systems, the EMC,
and the DIRC to select a charged track consistent with
the pion hypothesis. We constrain the ?þ track and K0S
candidate to originate from a common vertex.
Signal events that are misreconstructed with the decay
products of one or more daughters completely or partially
exchanged with other particles in the rest of the event have
degraded kinematic resolution. We refer to these as “self-
cross-feed” (SCF) events. This misreconstruction has a
strong dependence on the energy of the particles concerned
and is more frequent for low-energy particles, i.e., for
decays in the corners of the Dalitz plot. Because of the
presence of a ?0 in the final state, there is a significant
probability for signal events to be misreconstructed due to
low-energy photons from the ?0 decay. Using a classifi-
cation based on MC information, we find that in simulated
events the SCF fraction depends strongly on the resonant
substructure of the signal and ranges from 34% for Bþ ?
Kð892Þþ?0 to 50% for Bþ ? ?ð770ÞþK0S. In events
simulated uniformly in phase space, hereafter referred to
as nonresonant MC, the SCF fraction varies from less than
10% in the center of the Dalitz plot to almost 70% in the
two corners of the Dalitz plot, where either the ?0 or the ?þ
has low energy. We describe how the SCF events are
handled in Sec. VI.
In order to suppress the dominant background, due to
continuum eþe? ? qq?ðq ¼ u; d; s; cÞ events, we employ a
boosted decision tree (BDT) algorithm that combines four
variables commonly used to discriminate jetlike qq? events
from the more spherical BB? events in the eþe? center-of-
mass (CM) frame. The first of these is the ratio of the
second-to-zeroth order momentum-weighted Legendre pol-
ynomial moments,
where the summations are over all tracks and neutral
clusters in the event, excluding those that form the B
candidate (the “rest of the event” or ROE); pi is the particle
momentum, and ?i is the angle between the particle and
the thrust axis of the B candidate, hereafter also referred
to as the B. The three other variables entering the BDT
are the absolute value of the cosine of the angle between
the B direction and the collision axis, the zeroth-order
momentum-weighted Legendre polynomial moment, and
the absolute value of the output of another BDT used for
“flavor tagging,” i.e., for distinguishing B from B? decays
using inclusive properties of the decay of the other B meson
in the ?ð4SÞ ? BB? event [43]. Although flavor tagging is
not needed for charged B decays, the degree of tagging
certainty provides some discrimination between BB? pairs
and continuum background. The momentum-weighted
Legendre polynomial moments and the cosine of the angle
between the B direction and the beam axis are calculated in
the eþe? CM frame. The BDT is trained on a sample of
signal MC events and off-peak data. We apply a loose
criterion on the BDT output of BDTout > 0.06, which
retains approximately 70% of the signal while rejecting
92% of the qq? background.
In addition to BDTout, we use two kinematic variables to
distinguish the signal from the background:
and where p?s? is the total eþe? CM energy, with
ðEeþe?; peþe?Þ and ðEB;pBÞ the four-momenta of the initial
eþe? system and the B candidate, respectively, both
measured in the lab frame. The quantity E?B is the energy
of the B candidate measured in the eþe? CM frame. The
signal mES distribution for correctly reconstructed events is
approximately independent of their position in the K0S?þ?0
Dalitz plot and peaks near the B mass with a resolution of
about 3.4 MeV=c2.
We retain all candidates satisfying the following
selection criteria: 5.23 < mES < 5.29 GeV=c2 and ?0.3 <
?E < 0.3 GeV. The signal region, where the final fit to
data is performed, is defined by the tighter criteria 5.260 <
mES < 5.287 GeV=c2 and ?0.20 < ?E < 0.15 GeV. We
also use candidates in the sideband region of mES defined
by 5.23<mES <5.26GeV=c2 and ?0.20<?E < 0.15GeV
and subtract the BB? background contributions, predicted by
MC simulations, from the distribution for these sideband
events. We then add these distributions to the off-peak
data distributions to increase the statistical precision of
our model of the Dalitz plot distribution for continuum
background.
Each of the B candidates is refit to determine the Dalitz
plot variables. In these fits the K0S?þ?0 invariant mass is
constrained to the world average value of the B mass [28] to
improve position resolution within the Dalitz plot.
We find that 20% of the remaining events in nonresonant
MC have two or more candidates. We choose the best
candidate in multiple-candidate events based on the highest
B-vertex probability. This procedure is found to select a
correctly reconstructed candidate more than 60% of the
time and does not bias the fit variables.
The reconstruction efficiency over the Dalitz plot is
modeled using a two-dimensional (2D) binned distribution
based on a generated sample of approximately 2 × 106
simulated Bþ ? K0S?þ?0 MC events, where the events
uniformly populate phase space. All selection criteria are
applied except for those corresponding to a K? invariant-
mass veto described below, which is taken into account
separately. The 2D histogram of reconstructed MC events is
then divided by the 2D histogram of the generated MC
events. In order to expand regions of phase space with large
efficiency variations, the Dalitz plot variables are trans-
formed into “square Dalitz plot” [44] coordinates. We
obtain an average efficiency, for nonresonant MC events,
of approximately 15%. In the likelihood fit we use an
event-by-event efficiency that depends on the Dalitz plot
position.
In addition
to continuum events, background arises
from nonsignal BB? events. A major source of BB? back-
press this background, we veto events with 1.804< mK0S?0 <
1.924GeV=c2.
simulations and classified based on the shape of the mES,
?E, and Dalitz plot distributions. We identify nine catego-
ries of BB? backgrounds: categories 1, 2 and 3 include
different types of three- and four-body B decays involving
an intermediate D meson; categories 4 and 5 include
charmless four-body B decays to intermediate resonances
where a ?0 inthe final state is not reconstructed; categories 6
and 7 include two-body B decays with a radiated photon
misreconstructed as a ?0 decay product or where the ?0
arisesfrom the other B decay; category 8 includes charmless
three-body B decays where a charged pion is interchanged
with a ?0 meson from the other B; and finally category 9
includes all other simulated BB? background contributions.
Within each category, each of the mES, ?E, BDTout, and
Dalitz plot distributions are formed by combining the
contributions of all decay modes in the category. The
combinations are done by normalizing the distributions
for each decay mode to the expected number of events in
the recorded data sample, which is estimated using
reconstruction efficiencies determined from MC, the
number of BB? pairs in the recorded data sample, and
the branching fractions listed in Refs. [9,28]. For each
category, the histograms of mES, ?E, BDTout, and the Dalitz
plot variables are used as the probability density functions
(PDF) in the likelihood fit to data to model the BB?
background.
The etended lielihood function is given by
L ¼ exp
NkPikðm2K0S?þ;m2?þ?0;mES;?E;BDTout;qBÞ ;
where Nk is the number of candidates in each signal or
background category k, Ne is the total number of events
in the data sample, and Pik (the PDF for category k and
event i) is the product of the PDFs describing the Dalitz
plot, mES, ?E, and BDTout distributions, with qB the charge
of the B candidate.
To avoid possible biases in the determination of the fit
parameters [45], we use MC samples to study correlations
between the fit variables and the Dalitz plot parameters,
m2K0S?þ and m2?þ?0. We find that for correctly reconstructed
signal candidates, the ?E distribution is strongly dependent
on mK0S?þ. This is mostly due to a dependence of the energy
resolution of the B candidate on the ?0 momentum. For
SCF signal candidates, both the mES and ?E distributions
depend on all three two-body invariant masses: mK0S?þ,
mK0S?0, and m?þ?0. The mES, ?E, and BDTout distributions
for continuum and BB? backgrounds have negligible corre-
lations with the Dalitz plot parameters.
For correctly reconstructed signal candidates, the mES
and ?E PDFs are parameterized by a Cruijff function,
which is given by (omitting normalization factor)
where m gives the peak of the distribution and the
asymmetric width of the distribution is given by ?L for
x < m and ?R for x > m. The asymmetric modulation is
similarly given by ?L for x < m and ?R for x > m. The ?E
PDF parameters are calculated on an event-by-event basis
in terms of the K0S?þ invariant mass, as a linear function for
m2K0S?þ < 20 GeV2=c4 and as a quadratic function for
m2K0S?þ > 20 GeV2=c4. These functions are determined
by fitting the ?E distribution in large nonresonant MC
samples. For the SCF signal, in order to follow the rapid
shape variations across the Dalitz plot of the mES and ?E
distributions, we divide the Dalitz plot into several regions
as illustrated in Fig. 2. Each letter indicates whether the
dependence is on m2?þ?0, m2K0S?þ, or m2K0S?0. The regions are
chosen based on the distribution in the Dalitz plot of the
SCF fraction and the mean difference between the true and
reconstructed position in the Dalitz plot; we include more
regions in areas of the Dalitz plot where these quantities are
largest. As a representative example of the variation in ?E
distribution in nonresonant signal MC simulation, we show
in Fig. 3 the ?E distributions for regions C1, C2, C3, and
C4. We use mES and ?E PDFs specific to each region, as
listed in Table III. Some of the PDFs used in the para-
metrization of the SCF include Cruijff functions,
Chebychev polynomials, Gaussian functions, and two-
piece Gaussian (BGauss) functions. A two-piece
Gaussian function is an asymmetric Gaussian described
by the following functional form (omitting normalization
factor)
For the continuum background, we use an ARGUS
function [46] to parameterize the mES shape. The ?E
distribution is described by a linear function, and the
BDTout distribution by an exponential function. The
mES, ?E, and BDTout PDFs for BB? backgrounds are
defined by the sum of the histograms from the MC
simulations for decay modes in each background category,
as described in Sec. V.
The continuum and BB? background Dalitz plot distri-
butions are included in the likelihood as two-dimensional
histograms. For BB? backgrounds, we use MC samples. For
continuum background, we combine events from the off-
peak data and the mES sideband in on-peak data, after
subtracting contributions from B decays, as described in
Sec. IV. For the 2D histograms, we use the square Dalitz
plot coordinates. A linear interpolation between bin centers
is applied.
The free parameters in the fit are the yields for signal,
continuum background, and BB? background categories 1
and 9. The yields for the remaining BB? background
categories are fixed to the estimated values. All the PDF
parameters for the correctly reconstructed mES and ?E
PDFs, except for the tail parameters, are determined in the
fit. For each region of the Dalitz plot, the SCF fraction is
fixed to the value predicted by the nonresonant MC
simulation. All SCF signal PDF parameters are fixed to
values obtained from fits to nonresonant MC events. The
endpoint of the ARGUS function is fixed to 5.289 GeV=c2
while the shape parameter is determined in the fit. The
slope for the linear function of the ?E PDF and the
PDF for continuum background are similarly determined
in the fit. The isobar coefficients, x and y in Eq. (18), for all
but one of the isobar components are fitted parameters in
the fit and are measured relative to the fixed isobar
component. The coefficients for the reference isobar are
fixed to x ¼ 1 and y ¼ 0. In total, the fit is performed with
21 free parameters.
We determine a nominal signal Dalitz plot model based
on information from previous studies [16,18–20], and on
the changes in the log likelihood in the fit to data when
resonances are added to, or removed from, the list shown in
Table II. In these fits to the combined Bþ and B? data
samples, the CP coefficients ?x and ?y are fixed to zero.
Based on the change in log likelihood and accounting
for the change in the number of degrees of freedom when
Kð1680Þ0, or Kð1680Þþ, are added to the default model
one at a time, we find that the significance of each
resonance is well below 3 sigma. Therefore we do not
include any of these additional resonances in the
nominal fit. We also note that the fit fractions for these
additional resonances, reported in Table IV, are consistent
with zero.
We do not observe an excess of events for invariant
masses greater than 2 GeV=c2, suggesting that a non-
resonant component, in addition to that included in the
LASS parametrization, is not necessary. We observe that
if we add a nonresonant component to the fit, the change
in log likelihood for the binned data and the fit
?þ?0 invariant
masses are consistent with the expected change due to
the additional free parameters in the fit, and do not
indicate any statistically significant nonresonant compo-
nent. We therefore conclude that, with the current level
of statistical sensitivity, the base model, which includes
resonances, provides an adequate description of the data.
We apply the fit described in Sec. VI to the 31876
selected Bþ ? K0S?þ?0 candidates. A first fit is performed
on the combined B sample. We obtain yields of 1014 
60 signal events, 24381  200 continuum events, 2745 
70 BB? events in category 1, and 1768  140 BB? events in
category 9. The results of the fit are shown in Fig. 4. For the
purpose of this figure, the contributions of signal events are
enhanced by applying the more restrictive selection criteria
listed in Table V.
The branching fraction for Bþ ? K0?þ?0 is determined
from the number of signal events, the efficiency estimated
from MC events, and the total number of BB? events in data.
We take into account differences between the ?0
reconstruction efficiency in data and MC events,determined
from control samples with either ? leptons or initial-state
radiation, as a function of ?0 momentum (??dMatCa ¼ 97.2%,
averaged over ?0 momentum). Wecorrect for small biases in
the branching fraction, as determined from MC pseudo
experiments generated with the same number of signal
events and resonance composition as found in the fit to
data. We divide the partial branching fraction of
Bþ ? K0Sð??þ??Þ?þ?0 by the branching fraction for
K0S ? ?þ ??, and multiply the result by a factor of 2 to
account for K0S decay, to obtain the branching fraction
result BðBþ ? K0?þ?0Þ ¼ ð31.8  1.8  2.1þ?60..00Þ × 10?6,
where the first uncertainty is statistical, the second is
systematic, and the third is due to assumptions made
concerning the signal model. The latter two uncertainties
are described in Sec. VIII and the breakdown of the
systematic uncertainties is detailed in Table XI.
We measure amplitudes and phases relative to each of the
five two-body decays in the signal model to take advantage
of the smaller uncertainty observed when measuring the
relative phases of the two pairs of decays with same-charge
K resonances. Table VI lists the relative phase, ?, between
each pair of two-body decays in the signal model and its
uncertainty. The statistical uncertainty in the relative phase
is smallest ð?10°Þ for the resonances that decay to the
same-charge K? state. This is due to a larger overlap in the
Dalitz plot between the same-charge K resonances than
occurs for other pairs of resonances that only overlap in the
corners of the Dalitz plot.
Since the statistical uncertainties of the fit fractions
do not depend on the reference mode, we quote in
Table VII only the fit fractions from the fit where the
Kð892Þ0?þ amplitude is the reference. The fit fractions
for the K0ð1430Þ0?þ and K0ð1430Þþ?0 modes are the
product of the ðK?Þ0 S-wave fit fraction, shown in
Table VII, and the fraction due to the resonant contribution
in the LASS parametrization (88%). The off-diagonal fit
fractions are small compared to the diagonal elements.
We calculate the branching fractions for the resonant
contributions shown in Table VIII as the product of the
total branching fraction and the fit fractions returned by
the fit to data, including appropriate Clebsch-Gordan
coefficients.
To determine the overall CP asymmetry as well as the
CP asymmetries for the contributing isobar components,
samples. The overall ACP value is calculated from the
integrals of the positive and negative signal Dalitz plot
distributions. The ?x and ?y parameters from Eq. (18)
are allowed to vary in the fit for all components except
the reference isobar, for which the ?y parameter is fixed
to zero (the relative phase of the Bþ and B? Dalitz plots
cannot be determined since they do not interfere). To
account for possible differences in the reconstruction and
particle identification efficiencies for Bþ and B?, the
efficiency map as a function of the Dalitz plot position is
determined separately for Bþ and B?. The asymmetry for
the continuum background is allowed to vary in the fit,
and is found to be consistent with zero. The CP
asymmetries of the BB? backgrounds are expected to
be small and so are fixed to zero in the nominal fit. They
are varied within reasonable ranges based on world
average experimental results [28] in order to determine
the associated systematic uncertainty.
K0?þ?0Þ ¼ 0.07  0.05  0.03þ?00..0032, where the first uncer-
tainty is statistical, the second is systematic, and the third is
due to the signal model. This is consistent with zero CP
asymmetry. Invariant mass projections for the fit to data
allowing for direct CP violation are shown in Fig. 5.
Table VIII shows the results for the branching fractions
and CP asymmetries obtained from the fit to data. The first
uncertainty is statistical, the second is systematic, and the
third is the uncertainty associated with the signal model.
We observe a significant asymmetry between the mK0?þ
and mK0S?? distributions in the region of the Kð892SÞþ
resonance; see Figs. 5(a) and (b). We determine the
statistical significance, S, of a nonzero CP asymmetry in
Bþ ? Kð892Þþ?0 from the difference between the best-fit
value of the likelihood, LACP, and the value when the CP
Using this method, we measure a statistical significance
of 3.6 standard deviations for a nonzero ACP in
standard deviations for the statistical significance by
dividing the central value of the CP asymmetry by the
statistical uncertainty, indicating that the log-likelihood
function is close to parabolic. Figure 6 displays the
contours in the complex plane of the coefficients
c ¼ ðx þ ?x; y þ ?yÞ, defined in Eq. (4), for Bþ ?
We also express the complex isobar coefficients c and c?
of Eq. (18) in terms of amplitudes and phases,
Table IX presents the results, measured with respect to the
B ? Kð892Þ0? reference amplitude. The statistical
uncertainties of the separate Bþ and B? decay amplitudes,
Aþ and A?, vary between 0.1 and 0.3. We thus obtain
significant statistical precision for these terms. With
respect to the phases, ?þ and ??, only the ðK?Þ00?þ
amplitude yields a statistically precise result. For the
other amplitudes, the statistical uncertainty ranges
between 70° and 170°, and only the statistical uncer-
tainty is quoted. For the more precisely determined
variables, systematic uncertainties are evaluated as well.
Because the statistical uncertainties on the phases of the
ðK?Þ0?0 and Kð892Þ?0 amplitudes listed in Table IX
are highly correlated, we also calculate the phase
differences, for which the statistical uncertainties are
smaller. The results, including systematic uncertainties,
are:
We evaluate systematic uncertainties to account for
effects that could affect the branching fractions, phases,
and asymmetries, by varying the fixed parameters. The
systematic uncertainties described in this section are
summarized in Tables XI through XVI of Appendix A.
The uncertainties associated with the branching frac-
tions are listed in Table XI. To estimate the uncertainty
related to the modeling of the SCF PDFs, we implement a
simpler model consisting of only four regions in the Dalitz
plot. The PDFs are defined by the distribution of SCF MC
events in each of these new regions. We then fit the data
using the new SCF model and take the uncertainties to be
the change in the fit parameters compared to those
obtained from the nominal fit to data. All relative system-
atic uncertainties due to the SCF mES and ?E PDFs range
from approximately 1% to 4%, except for the relative
systematic uncertainty for the Bþ ? ?ð770ÞþK0 decay,
which is 7.5%. This is consistent with expectations from
simulation that more than half the Bþ ? ?ð770ÞþK0
events are due to SCF.
The uncertainties associated with the number of BB?
background events are evaluated by varying the estimates
within their uncertainties, which are primarily due to
uncertainties in the branching fractions. The uncertainties
related to the BB? background mES, ?E, and BDTout PDFs
are accounted for by varying the histogram bin contents
according to their statistical uncertainties. The uncertainty
is then taken as the RMS of the distribution of the
difference in the fit parameters. The uncertainties related
to the limited statistical precision of the MC and data-
sideband samples are similarly accounted for by varying
the results in the corresponding histogram bins by their
uncertainties. The uncertainty due to possible variations of
the SCF fraction is estimated by varying each bin of the
PDF distribution by an uncertainty of 2%.
PDFs for
correctly reconstructed and SCF signal events is deter-
mined by varying the bin contents in accordance with the
observed data/MC difference. For correctly reconstructed
signal events, the tails of the asymmetric Gaussian PDFs
for mES and ?E are fixed. To account for an associated
uncertainty, we allow the relevant parameters to vary in a fit
to data and use the variation in the fit parameters to define
the uncertainty.
To validate the fitting procedure, 500 MC pseudo
experiments are generated, using the PDFs with parameter
values found from the fit to data. Small fit biases are found
for some of the fit parameters and are included in the
systematic uncertainties.
We also account for uncertainties in the following
parameters describing the signal model: the mass and width
of each resonance and the value of the Blatt-Weisskopf
barrier radius. The associated uncertainties are determined
byvaryingthe parameterswithin their uncertainties(someof
which are given in Table II) and refitting.
The uncertainties in the branching fractions related
to particle identification, tracking efficiency, and the
total number of BB? events are 1.0%, 1.0%, and 0.6%,
respectively. We estimate systematic uncertainties in
the branching fractions associated with the ?0 and K0S
reconstruction efficiencies to be 1.0% and 1.1%,
respectively.
Uncertainties from all the above sources are added in
quadrature to yield the total systematic uncertainties, which
are listed in Table XI.
We determine changes in the branching fractions,
?B, when the signal model is varied. The systematic
uncertainties in the branching fractions due to the
the LASS model with another phenomenologically
inspired parametrization [47]. We take the differences
in branching fractions with respect to the nominal fit as
the systematic uncertainty. This is the largest contribution
to the uncertainty due to the model. Another uncertainty
reflects any changes in the fit parameters for the nominal
model when including components that are omitted in
and
negative variations are added separately in quadrature to
obtain the systematic uncertainties due to the signal
model, listed in Table XI.
We determine systematic uncertainties in the phases
averaged over Bþ and B? decays from the same sources as
considered for the branching fractions. The variations in the
phases are measured relative to the Kð892Þ0?þ amplitude.
Since the differences between positive and negative shifts
in the phases, shown in Table XII, are large in some cases,
we quote for those phase shifts asymmetric systematic
uncertainties.
Reconstruction and particle identification efficiencies
cancel to first order in the fit to CP asymmetries; therefore
the only uncertainties that are included for ACP are those
coming from the fit and signal model. In addition to this, we
do not evaluate any of the uncertainties that are found to be
negligible for the branching fractions.
An additional uncertainty for ACP arises from having
fixed the CP asymmetries for individual BB? background
components to zero. We vary the CP asymmetry indi-
vidually for each B background category, based on the
world-average experimental results [9], and take as
the corresponding uncertainty the sum in quadrature of
the largest of the positive or negative change in ACP.
The uncertainty related to the efficiency model is
determined by exchanging the efficiency maps for the
positive and negative Dalitz plots and refitting the data. We
then take the difference in CP asymmetry with respect to
the nominal fit as the uncertainty.
We list in Table XIII the systematic uncertainties
associated with the signal CP asymmetries and the varia-
tions in the asymmetry due to changes in the signal
composition.
We evaluate systematic uncertainties for the CP ampli-
tudes and CP phases from the same sources as for the CP
asymmetries. We list the variations to the amplitudes Aþ in
Table XIVand to the amplitudes A? in Table XV, including
the uncertainties due to changes to the signal model.
Table XVI lists the systematic variations and model
uncertainties for ?þð?ÞððK?Þ00?þð?Þ ? Kð892Þ0?þð?ÞÞ
and ?þð?ÞððK?Þ0þð?Þ?0 ? Kð892Þþð?Þ?0Þ.
The measured branching fractions and CP asymmetries
are summarized in Table VIII, and the amplitude and phase
values in Table IX, including statistical, systematic, and
model uncertainties. We have measured for the first time
the branching fraction and CP asymmetry for the decay
Bþ ? K0?þ?0. We obtain first evidence for direct CP
violation in the intermediate decay Bþ ? Kð892Þþ?0,
with a total significance of 3.4 standard deviations deter-
mined by adding statistical, systematic, and signal-model
uncertainties in quadrature and dividing the measured ACP
by the total uncertainty.
In addition, we have measured the branching fractions,
CP asymmetries, and relative CP-averaged phase values
?ð770ÞþK0. The results for the branching fractions and
CP asymmetries for Bþ ? Kð892Þ0?þ are consistent with
the previous measurements from Bþ ? Kþ???þ decays by
the Belle and BABAR Collaborations and the branching
previous BABAR measurement and within two standard
deviations of the Belle measurement [16,17]. The branch-
ing fraction for Bþ ? Kð892Þþ?0 is consistent with the
previous measurement from the BABAR Collaboration in
the Bþ ? Kþ?0?0 decay mode and the result for ACP is
within two standard deviations of the previous measure-
ment [18]. The branching fraction and ACP results for
Bþ ? ?ð770ÞþK0 supersede the previous BABAR mea-
surements [14]. The CP asymmetries of Bþ ?
are all consistent with zero, as expected. We obtain the first
measurements of the branching fraction and CP asymmetry
for Bþ ? K0ð1430Þþ?0, with a significance of 5.4 stan-
dard deviations for the branching fraction.
We combine our results for the branching fractions
K0ð1430Þ0?þ, and Bþ ? Kð892Þþ?0 with the previous
BABAR measurements. The statistical uncertainties and all
systematic uncertainties for the CP asymmetries are
uncorrelated between the measurements. For the branching
fractions, we account for possible correlations when
combining the systematic uncertainties. If the systematic
uncertainties are asymmetric, the average systematic uncer-
tainty is calculated from the largest limit. The combined
results from BABAR for these decay modes are presented in
Table X.
Using the world average value for direct CP violation in
B0 ? Kð892Þþ?? [9] and the final BABAR result for direct
CP violation in Bþ ? Kð892Þþ?0, we calculate ?ACP for
the K? system to be
Thus the value of ?ACP in K? is found to be consistent
with zero. The uncertainty in the ?ACPðK?Þ result
remains large, rendering the comparison to ?ACPðK?Þ,
given in Eq. (3), inconclusive at present and motivating
improved determinations in future experiments.
Table XI lists the uncertainties in the branching fractions
due to systematic effects, efficiency corrections, and
changes to the signal model. Table XII lists uncertainties
in the relative phase values (for Bþ and B? decays
combined) due to systematic effects and changes to the
signal model. Tables XIII, XIV, XV, and XVI list the
systematic and signal model uncertainties for the CP
asymmetries, the amplitudes for the Bþ and B? Dalitz
plots, Aþ and A?, respectively, and the corresponding
phases ?þ and ?? for the Bþ ? K0ð1430Þ0?þ amplitude
relative to that for Bþ ? Kð892Þ0?þ, and the phase values
for the Bþ ? ðK?Þ0þ?0 amplitude relative to that for
