Title:
Search for millicharged particles in proton-proton collisions at s = 13 TeV

Abstract:

----------------------


Text:
----------------------
Over a quarter of the mass energy of the Universe is
widely thought to be some kind of nonluminous “dark”
matter (DM), however, all experiments to date have failed
to confirm its existence as a particle, much less its
properties. The possibility that DM is not a single particle,
but rather a diverse set of particles with as complex a
structure in their sector as normal matter, has grown in
prominence in the past decade, beginning with attempts
to explain observations in high-energy astrophysics
experiments [1,2].
Many experimental efforts have been launched to look
for signs of a dark sector, including searches at high-
energy colliders, explorations at low-energy colliders,
precision tests, and effects in DM direct detection
experiments (for recent reviews see Refs. [3–5]). Most
of these experiments target the dark sector via a massive
dark photon, in what we refer to as the “Okun phase”
[6,7]. An alternative assumption, which we call the
“Holdom phase” [7,8], results in massless dark photons.
In these models the principal physical effect is that new
dark sector particles that couple to the dark photon will
have a small effective electric charge. These are generi-
cally called millicharged particles since a natural value
for their electric charge of Q ? ?e=? arises from one-
loop effects [9]. In this paper we use the symbol ? to
denote a millicharged particle. For a given mass and
charge, the pair production of millicharged particles at
the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is almost
model independent. Every standard model (SM) process
that results in dilepton pairs through a virtual photon
would, if kinematically allowed, also produce ?þ?? pairs
with a cross section reduced by a factor of ðQ=eÞ2 and
by mass-dependent factors that are well understood.
Millicharged particles can also be produced through Z
boson couplings that depend on their hypercharge [7].
Previous experiments have searched for millicharged
particles [10–17]. The parameter space spanned by the
mass and charge of ? is also constrained by indirect
observations from astrophysical systems [9,15,18–24],
terrestrial matter [25], the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) [26], big-bang nucleosynthesis [27], and universe
overclosure bounds [18]. While direct searches robustly
constrain the parameter space of millicharged particles,
indirect observations can be evaded by adding extra degrees
of freedom, which can readily occur in minimally extended
dark sector models [7]. In particular, the parameter space
1 < m? < 100 GeV, an ideal mass range for production at
the LHC, is largely unexplored by direct (or indirect)
searches. Such a signature would not be detectable by the
CMS and ATLAS experiments at the LHC [28,29], as all
detector elements rely on the electromagnetic (EM) inter-
action of the millicharged particle with ordinary matter. For
a millicharged particle the interaction strength is reduced by
a factor of ðQ=eÞ2 with respect to that of a particle of the
same mass that has charge e. The detector signal is also
reduced by the same factor, and is typically too small to be
recorded by detectors designed for particles of charge e.
The production of millicharged particles in collider experi-
ments would result in events with missing transverse
momentum, however, SM processes with neutrinos as well
as instrumental effects tend to overwhelm their signatures.
No searches for particles with Q ? 0.1e have been per-
formed at hadron colliders.
It is then clear that dedicated detectors are needed to
search for millicharged particles at a hadron collider. In
2016, we discussed the possibility to build such a detector
at the LHC, which we called milliQan [30], at the CMS
experimental site and aligned with the CMS interaction
point (IP). Since then we have installed and operated a
small fraction of such a detector (“milliQan demonstrator”)
to measure backgrounds and provide a proof of principle
and feedback for the full detector design. In 2018, the
demonstrator collected a dataset of proton-proton (pp)
interactions corresponding to an integrated luminosity
of 37.5 fb?1, at a center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV.
This corresponds to 86% of the total luminosity delivered
by the LHC in the period the demonstrator was opera-
tional. While the demonstrator is only ?1% of the full
milliQan, the data collected already provides competitive
constraints on the existence of millicharged particles of
mass 20–4700 MeV=c2 and Q=e ? 0.01–0.3.
A thick sensitive volume is required to be capable of
observing the small energy deposition of a particle with
Q ? 0.1e. The milliQan demonstrator is, therefore, com-
posed of three layers of 80 × 5 × 5 cm scintillator bar
arrays pointing to the CMS IP, with each array consisting of
three pairs of bars, stacked on a 3.6 m long rectangular
aluminum tube, for a total of 18 bars. We label the closest,
middle and furthest layer from the CMS IP as layer 1,
layer 2 and layer 3, respectively.
The milliQan demonstrator is located in an underground
tunnel at a distance of 33 m from the CMS IP, with 17 m of
rock between the CMS IP and the demonstrator that
provides shielding from most particles produced in LHC
collisions. In the CMS coordinate system [29], the detector
is positioned at an azimuthal angle (?) of 43° and
pseudorapidity (?) of 0.1. Diagrams of the detector’s
position are shown in Fig. 1. Located 70 m underground,
the muon flux from cosmic rays is reduced by a factor of
?100 compared to the surface. The detector is aligned
using standard laser-based survey techniques such that the
center of the scintillator array projects a line to within 1 cm
of the CMS IP. This alignment is validated using muons
produced at the CMS IP, as discussed in Sec. IV C.
In addition to the scintillator bars, additional components
were installed to reduce or characterize certain types of
backgrounds. Lead bricks are placed between the layers to
prevent low-energy secondary particles from one layer
from entering another layer. Four scintillator slabs are
located along the length of the detector to tag throughgoing
particles, provide time information, and shield the bars
from neutron radiation. Thin scintillator panels cover the
top and sides, providing the ability to reject cosmic muons.
Lastly, hodoscopes consisting of 2 × 2 × 45 cm scintillator
volumes are used to identify the tracks of beam and cosmic
muons. A diagram of the detector components is shown
in Fig. 2, and a photograph of the installed detector is
shown in Fig. 3. All scintillator volumes are comprised of
Eljen EJ-200 [31].
Scintillator light in the bars, panels, and slabs is detected
by photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) coupled to the scintillator
volumes. Three types of PMTs are used in order to test
different manufacturers and gains: the Hamamatsu R878,
Hamamatsu R7725 [32], and Electron Tube 9814B [33].
Analog signals from each PMT are sent to two 16-channel
samples per second with 12-bit resolution, providing
1024 samples within a 640 ns acquisition window. Each
scintillator volume with a PMT attached is referred to as a
“channel.” Since millicharged particles produced at the
CMS IP would traverse the full length of the detector in
Oð10Þ ns, tight timing requirements allow for a significant
reduction in combinatoric backgrounds by requiring the
coincidence of in time signals in all layers, as described in
Sec. V. The PMTs are powered by a CAEN SY5527 power
supply system [35]. The hodoscopes are readout with
silicon photomultipliers. Their data are triggered and stored
independently from the main data stream.
The dataset analyzed for this search was collected during
2018, including periods with the LHC beam providing pp
collisions (the “beam-on” dataset) and periods with no
collisions (the “beam-off” dataset). The beam-off dataset
provides a statistically independent sample to study back-
ground processes. The detector is located in an area in the
far fringe field of the CMS superconducting magnet, and
both beam-on and beam-off datasets were recorded with the
magnet at its nominal strength of 3.8 T. The actual magnetic
field in the milliQan cavern is measured by magnetic field
sensors installed in various positions around the detector.
We find this magnetic field to be under 2 mT when the CMS
magnet is at 3.8 T. Additional data samples were recorded
with the field at 0 T for PMT calibration.
Data is collected by triggering on the coincidence of at
least three channels (triple coincidence) within a window of
100 ns. A bar contributes to this coincidence if it has a
rising edge consistent with a single photoelectron thresh-
old, and the panels and slabs contribute to the coincidence
with more stringent thresholds appropriate for identification
of muons from cosmic rays (“cosmic muons”) and muons
from pp interactions (“beam muons”). The total trigger
live times were 1106 and 1042 hours for the beam-on and
beam-off datasets, respectively. The average trigger rate
was 14.4 Hz. Outside of the beam time, additional special-
ized runs were taken using single-channel and double-
coincidencetriggers,with different thresholds and operating
voltage settings, in order to collect data samples for
calibrations and validation studies.
We first calibrate the size of the generated pulses in each
channel, which requires a measurement of the average
size of a pulse from a single photoelectron (SPE) in each
PMT, as well as the mean number of photoelectrons hNPEi
generated in each channel by a throughgoing muon. The
former is strictly a property of each PMT, while the latter
depends on each scintillator, its wrapping, its coupling to
the PMT, and the PMT quantum efficiency.
The SPE calibration is performed in situ by isolating
pulses from late-arriving scintillation photons, which
largely produce SPEs in the PMTs. The mean SPE area
is then found by locating the peak of the resulting pulse area
distribution. These measurements are cross-checked by
bench measurements of SPE waveforms generated by a
flashing LED, following the method outlined in Ref. [36].
In the following, the npe of a given pulse is defined as the
pulse area divided by this per-channel SPE calibration, and
represents an estimate of the true number of photoelectrons
that generated the pulse.
For panels and slabs, the hNPEi calibration is performed
directly based on throughgoing beam muons (slabs) and
cosmic muons (panels). The measured average pulse area is
scaled by the per-channel SPE measurement to calculate
the mean number of photoelectrons generated by a beam or
cosmic muon.
For the bars, we use cosmic ray muons for calibration.
Direct calibration with radioactive sources was not possible
because the detector could not be accessed during LHC
running. Since cosmic ray muons saturate the readout, we
take an indirect approach, using the fact that the PMT
response scales as a power law over a wide range of
operating voltages. First, the mean areas of cosmic muon
pulses are measured at 5–6 operating voltages, which are
low enough to ensure that the PMT signals do not saturate.
A power law function is then fit to these points, and
extrapolated to the nominal operating voltage. Finally, this
number is scaled by the per-channel SPE measurement to
arrive at an estimate of the number of photoelectrons
generated by a cosmic muon. The validity of the power
law assumption is confirmed by separately fitting a power
law function to the mean areas of SPE pulses over a range
of voltages near the nominal operating voltage. The fitted
exponent is found to be consistent with that from the fit to
the cosmic muon pulse areas for all bars. The calibrated
value of hNPEi for a beam muon traversing the full 80 cm
length of a bar varies from 22 000 to 82 000; this means
that hNPEi ¼ 1 is expected in the bars for particles of
charge Q=e ? 0.004–0.007.
The dominant source of uncertainty in each bar’s hNPEi
measurement is the statistical uncertainty from the power
law fit and extrapolation, which is 10%–20% depending on
the channel, and is uncorrelated between channels. Smaller
uncertainties, generally on the order of a few percent, come
from differences in the residual magnetic field between
calibration runs and data-taking runs; the effect of a
low-pass filter applied to the waveforms; and differences
between the in situ and lab-based SPE measurements.
These are correlated between bars with PMTs of the same
type. Time dependent drifts in the response, inferred from
variations in the dark count rate, are subdominant.
The timing of the PMTs must also be calibrated. The
calibration procedure is designed such that a particle
traveling near the speed of light through the detector from
the CMS IP should have the same time value in every bar,
panel and slab. This calibration is performed using both
beam and cosmic muons. Figure 4 shows the time differ-
ence between a muon pulse in layer 3 compared to a muon
pulse in layer 1, where the events have been categorized as
either beam or cosmic muons based on the timing of the
pulses in the slabs. The resolution in the time difference
between layers is approximately 4 ns for beam muons
which travel through the detector from the CMS IP. An
additional correction is applied to account for the depend-
ence of the timing of the pulses on their size. This
correction is derived using secondary particles that result
from the interactions of beam muons with the detector as
they traverse it. The timing resolution degrades as the
size of the pulses gets smaller; the resolution of the lowest
npe pulses passing the selection outlined in Sec. V is
?15 ns. The modeling of the timing of these secondaries is
used to derive a systematic uncertainty in the timing in
simulation.
The trigger efficiency is measured as a function of npe for
each channel by comparing the rate between dedicated
triple-coincidence runs and double-coincidence runs. For
the triple-coincidence runs, the trigger decision is based on
coincident signals in two “tag-channels” and one “probe
channel,” whose trigger efficiency is to be measured. For
the double coincidence runs, the trigger decision involves
only the two tag channels. The trigger efficiency for each
channel is given by the ratio of the pulse rate when the
probe channel is required in the trigger over the pulse rate
when the probe channel is not required in the trigger. This
efficiency is used to reweight the simulated samples of
signals from millicharged particles described in Sec. IV B.
The trigger efficiency is measured to reach 100% for
npe ? 2 for all channels.
We generate pair production of millicharged particles in
13 TeV pp collisions through the Drell-Yan process, as well
as from ?, J=?, ?ð2SÞ, ?, ?, and ? decays into ?þ??, and
from Dalitz decays of ?0, ?, ?0, and ?.
Drell-Yan events are generated assuming that ?s are
isospin singlet fermions, using the Lagrangian of Ref. [37]
implemented in the MADGRAPH5_aMC@NLO [38] event
generator, with a minimum invariant mass requirement
on the millicharged pair of 2 GeV=c2. Because of the
limited integrated luminosity and the small size of the
demonstrator, there is essentially no sensitivity to Drell-Yan
production of millicharged particles in the dataset discussed
in this paper.
The production cross section and transverse momentum
distribution of J=? and ?ð2SÞ in the central rapidity
pT
y region is taken from calculations of charmonium
production from direct processes [39–41] and
tainties. Theoretical calculations of bottomonium produc-
tion [45] are not reliable at low transverse momentum
(pT < 15 GeV) [46], where most of the cross section lies.
As a result, for pT > 20 GeV we use the cross sections and
pT spectra measured at a center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV
[47]; at lower pT we use measurements from 7 TeV data
[48,49], rescaled using the measured ratio of 13 to 7 TeV
cross sections at slightly higher rapidity (2 < y < 2.5) [50].
All relevant light flavor mesons except ? mesons are
generated with the minimum bias PYTHIA8 generator [51]
with the Monash 2013 tune [52]. This is the tune that gives
the best agreement with several measurements of light
meson rates and pT spectra at the LHC, albeit in most cases
at center-of-mass energies lower than 13 TeV [53–56]. The
Monte Carlo spectra for ?ð?;?Þ with pT < 3 (1) GeV are
scaled down by factors as large as 2, based on the
experimental results cited above. On the other hand, the
production of ? mesons is modeled with the minimum bias
PYTHIA6 generator [57] with the DW tune [58], since this
Monte Carlo setup best reproduces ? meson data [59]. All
PYTHIA Monte Carlo generations are normalized to a
minimum bias cross section of 80  10 mb based on a
measurement by ATLAS [60], with an uncertainty taken to
cover the difference with respect to a similar CMS
measurement [61]. We assess an additional 30% uncer-
tainty in the overall rate of each process to account for
remaining differences between experimental measurements
and PYTHIA predictions of the rates of light mesons per
minimum bias event, based on the references cited above.
The branching fractions for all vector meson decays,
V ? ?þ??, as a function of the ? mass are calculated using
the Van Royen-Weisskopf formula [62], normalized to the
PDG value of the branching fraction for V ? eþe? [63],
and rescaled appropriately for the assumed charge of the ?.
The branching fractions for meson Dalitz decays, e.g., ?0 ?
?þ??? or ? ? ?þ???0, as well as the ?þ?? invariant mass
distributions in these decays are modeled as a function of
the ? mass and charge using the partial width for decays
into photons, e.g., ?0 ? ?? or ? ? ?0? [64], assuming a
vector dominance model for the form factors.
Production cross sections of millicharged particles
from different processes are summarized in Fig. 5. The
possible contribution from millicharged particle produc-
tion in EM showers in the CMS calorimeters generated
by particles from pp collisions is not considered in this
analysis.
We also generate inclusive muon events (pp ? X ? ?)
that are used for calibration and background studies. The
same theoretical calculation used to obtain the differential
cross sections of J=? and ?ð2SÞ from bottom hadron
decays is also used to generate muons from bottom and
charm hadron decays, while muons from decays in flight of
pions and kaons are generated with PYTHIA8 using the
Monash 2013 tune. Muons from W and Z decays are taken
from MADGRAPH5, though these electroweak processes
contribute only ?3% of the total muon flux. Finally, muons
are generated using an appropriate angular distribution to
simulate cosmic ray events. This angular distribution is
derived by assuming a cos2ð?zenithÞ distribution at the
surface and propagating the muons to the demonstrator
using the method described in Sec. IV B.
Generated particles are propagated through a simplified
model of the material in the CMS detector, including the
magnetic field, and the 17 m of rock between the CMS
cavern and the demonstrator.
Propagation is performed with fourth-order Runge-Kutta
integration, incorporating the effects of the magnetic field,
multiple scattering, and energy loss. Particles are propa-
gated until 2 m before the face of the demonstrator, after
which they are fed into a full GEANT4 [65] simulation of the
remaining rock, the drainage gallery where the demon-
strator is located, and the demonstrator itself. Similarly,
muons from cosmic ray showers are propagated from the
surface of the earth to a plane 1 m above the top of the
cavern. Muon interactions in the cavern walls generate
showers of gamma rays and electrons that significantly
contribute to the cosmic ray background. A simulated
cosmic ray shower event is shown in Fig. 6.
The simulation parameters are nominally configured to
be consistent with EJ-200 scintillator and existing mea-
surements for Tyvek reflectivity and each PMT species’
quantum efficiency [66]. Overall photon propagation is
handled using GEANT4’s UNIFIED optical model [67].
Photon propagation is further calibrated by measuring
the effects of scintillator roughness and wrapping quality
on light attenuation in the scintillator bars and matching the
effect in simulation. These measurements indicated a
wrapping reflectivity R ¼ 0.97 and scintillator roughness
? ¼ 1%, typical values for Tyvek and EJ-200 [68]. A per-
channel calibration is applied to each PMT quantum
efficiency so that the measured hNPEi values agree between
data and simulation.
The electronic response is simulated using SPE wave-
form templates measured on a test bench with an LED.
SPE templates for each GEANT4 photoelectron are added
together, with appropriate arrival times, and including
the individual PMT calibration described in Sec. III. The
resulting waveform is then added to a randomly selected
zero-bias data waveform to properly account for elec-
tronic noise.
The simulation is validated by studying beam muons as
well as cosmic ray events. The absolute rate of beam muons
passing through all four slabs is compared with the rate
predicted from a simulated sample of muon production
from heavy-flavor and electroweak decays, as well as
meson decays in flight, as described in Sec. IV B. We
measure a rate of 0.20  0.01 muons=pb?1, based on a
sample of 7363 muons, in agreement with the prediction of
0.25  0.08 muons=pb?1. The dominant uncertainties in
this prediction arise from the uncertainty in the bb? cross
section (21%) and from the modeling of the material
between the CMS IP and milliQan (25%). This last
uncertainty is derived from a 7% variation in the total
amount of intervening material, which is in turn due
primarily to uncertainties in both the thickness and density
of the rock layer. This 7% variation corresponds to a 25%
uncertainty in the muon rate because of the steeply falling
muon momentum distribution. This same variation is used
to derive a systematic uncertainty in the predicted signal
yields, though in that case the effect is much smaller
because of the smaller charge of the ?.
We additionally perform a comparison of the angular
distribution of beam muon trajectories, in order to probe the
scattering and magnetic field modeling in simulation and
validate the alignment of the detector. We compare rates of
muons passing through various subsets of bars that trace a
range of angles through the detector. The rates of these
paths in both the horizontal and vertical directions are
measured to be consistent within statistical uncertainties
between data and simulation.
Finally, the GEANT4 modeling is validated by compar-
ing distributions of photoelectron counts in bars near
either beam or cosmic muon trajectories. Hits are
expected from electrons and gamma rays produced as
the muon travels through the rock or nearby detector
material. An example comparison is shown in Fig. 7.
Here we show npe distributions in data and simulation in
events with a tagged beam muon, for bars that do not
contain a pulse consistent with originating from a muon
(npe < 750), and are not neighboring any such bars.
Contributions come primarily from electrons and gamma
rays produced in scintillator material, rock, or the lead
bricks. Good agreement is seen across a wide range of
npe levels.
The search for millicharged particles looks for a signal
with the signature of a pulse in each of the three layers of
the demonstrator. A number of sources can produce such a
signature:
(i) Each PMT has a dark current arising from effects
such as the thermal emission of electrons from the
cathode. The simplest background source comes
from random overlap of three such dark rate pulses.
In addition, dark rate counts may overlap with two
correlated pulses from another source.
Cosmic muon showers may generate a large number
of gamma rays and electrons from an interaction of
one or more cosmic ray muons with the rock in the
milliQan cavern. This may cause a pulse in each
layer of the demonstrator. Such a background could
also be expected from a beam muon that travels
close to the demonstrator.
Radiation in the cavern, scintillator bars or surround-
ing material can cause correlated deposits in several
bars. The lead blocks placed between layers should
reduce the probability of deposit in multiple layers
arising from photons or electrons while the slabs
provide shielding of neutrons.
(iv) Afterpulses, which are small pulses caused by
positive ions generated by the ionization of residual
gases in the PMT, can appear several hundred
nanoseconds to over a few microseconds after the
initial pulse. The afterpulses from correlated depos-
its in several PMTs may overlap and produce a
signal-like signature in the demonstrator. For this to
occur, the interaction event that gives rise to the
afterpulses must not be triggered because, in this
case, the afterpulses will fall in the 125 ?s readout
deadtime that follows each triggered event, and will
not be recorded.
Selections are applied in order to reject contributions
from these background sources. If there is a pulse within
the acquisition time window in any panel, or in more than
one bar in each layer, the event is rejected. These require-
ments reject backgrounds due to cosmic muon showers,
which are expected to cause deposits across the detector. In
addition, if there is a pulse in any slab within the acquisition
time window consistent with originating from a muon
(npe > 250) the event is vetoed. This requirement rejects
deposits due to beam and cosmic muons passing close to
the bars. The bars with reconstructed pulses are required to
be pointing to the CMS IP. This reduces the backgrounds
from neutrons, cosmic muon showers and random overlap,
while being efficient for signal, which typically has a small
angular spread. To mitigate backgrounds from afterpulses,
in each channel a requirement is made to reject the event if
a pulse occurs before the window in which the pulse may be
involved in the trigger decision. In addition, the first pulse
in each channel must have the largest npe value. Events that
contain initial pulses in the bars with a large spread in npe
(maximum npe/minimum npe > 10) are vetoed to reject
events containing contributions from different sources,
such as dark rate overlap with shower deposits or deposits
from two or more shower particles traveling through the
demonstrator. Finally, the maximum calibrated time differ-
ence between the first bar pulse in each layer (?tmax) is
required to be less than 15 ns, which is efficient for signals
traveling through the detector from the CMS IP and forms a
powerful rejection of backgrounds that have different paths
through the detector, such as cosmic muon showers, or that
have deposits in each layer that are uncorrelated in their
timing, such as dark rate overlap.
Selected events are subsequently categorized into five
signal regions (SRs) through requirements on both the
number of slabs that contain a pulse and the minimum npe
of the pulses in the three bars. This categorization allows
for sensitivity to a wide range of charge values in the signal
parameter space. The definitions of the five SRs are
summarized in Table I. For events with a pulse in each
of the three layers the selection criteria provide high
efficiency for the targeted models while rejecting the
background by more than 5 orders of magnitude.
Residual background passing selection is estimated for
each signal region by measuring the pass/fail ratio of the
timing requirement in events with a hit in each layer,
consistent with signal requirements except that the bars do
not form a pointing path towards the CMS IP, and then
multiplying it by the number of events failing the timing
selection that form a pointing path towards the CMS IP.
This prediction method relies on the independence of the
dominant backgrounds on the pointing path requirement.
This method is used rather than taking the prediction from
the beam-off dataset as it is robust against time dependent
drifts in the background rate. However, the beam-off
dataset provides a statistically independent sample to
validate the prediction without contamination from signal.
The results of the beam-off prediction for the SR are
summarized in Table II. The uncertainty in the prediction
reflects the limited statistics in the regions used to make the
prediction. The prediction is shown to be in agreement with
the observation for all validation regions. The level of
agreement between prediction and observation in each
validation region is used to derive a systematic uncertainty
in the prediction.
Given the validation of the background prediction
method with the beam-off dataset, the SR prediction is
made using the beam-on dataset. The background contri-
bution from beam processes is estimated from simulation to
be less than 2% for all regions. Results are given in
Table III. The predictions are seen to be consistent with
those from the beam-off dataset (taking the 6% difference
in collection time into account), which provides additional
confidence that the beam-based backgrounds are negli-
gible. The uncertainty in the prediction reflects both the
limited statistical power of the regions used for the
prediction as well as the systematic uncertainty derived
from the validation using the beam-off dataset. The
predictions are found to be consistent with the observations
in all SRs.
The search is interpreted using the signal model
described in Sec. IV. The full set of selection criteria
described in Sec. V is applied to each event. The efficiency
to pass these criteria for three benchmark ? masses and
charges is shown in Table I.
There are several sources of systematic uncertainty in
the number of signal events entering the SRs. These are
evaluated independently for each model point and are
summarized below:
(i) Signal cross section (described in Sec. IVA):
typically 15%–30% depending on the mass of the ?.
(ii) Material interactions (described in Sec. IV C):
typically 1%–5% depending on the charge and mass
of the ?.
Pulse timing (described in Sec. III): typically
1%–40% depending on the charge of the ?.
(iv) hNPEi calibration (described in Sec. III): 1%–50%
depending on the SR populated by the ?.
(v) Limited simulated sample size: up to 30%.
Under the signal plus background hypothesis, a modified
frequentist approach is used to determine observed upper
limits at 95% confidence level on the cross section (?) to
produce a pair of ?s, as a function of mass and charge. The
approach uses the LHC-style profile likelihood ratio as the
test statistic [69] and the criterion of the C.L. [70,71].
The observed upper limits are evaluated through the use of
asymptotic formulas [72]. Figure 8 shows the exclusion at
95% confidence level in mass and charge of the ?. The
exclusion is compared to existing constraints, showing new
sensitivity for ? masses above 700 MeV.
In Refs. [30,37] we assumed the largest irreducible
background to the signal would come from dark-current
pulses in the PMTs. From experience gained by operating
the demonstrator, we now know that an equally important
background comes from correlated effects caused by
activity in the scintillator (from effects such as environ-
mental radiation or cosmic muon showers). This realization
prompted us to revisit the milliQan design, adding a fourth
layer in order to mitigate the contribution from these
correlated backgrounds.
We have studied the effect of adding a fourth layer with
the demonstrator. The demonstrator has three rather than
four layers so backgrounds are determined for threefold
coincidence and then extended to fourfold using an addi-
tional pulse in a slab. The results of this study indicate that
the contribution from pure dark-current overlap drops to a
negligible level for the case of fourfold coincidence, even
with the somewhat high-noise PMTs that are used in the
demonstrator. The calculations presented in Refs. [30,37]
remain a conservative estimate of the milliQan discovery
potential since the background with four layers as measured
with the demonstrator is significantly smaller than the
estimate used in those simulations.
Given the experience obtained from the demonstrator,
we are confident that the proposed full-scale detector will
perform as expected provided sufficient funding becomes
available.
We have deployed a prototype dedicated detector at the
LHC to conduct the first search for elementary particles
with charges much smaller than the electron charge at a
hadron collider. We analyzedpa? data sample of proton-proton collisions collected at s? ¼ 13 TeV provided by
the LHC, corresponding to an integrated luminosity of
37.5 fb?1. The existence of new particles with masses
between 20 and 4700 MeV is excluded at 95% confidence
level for charges varying between 0.006e and 0.3e,
depending on mass. New sensitivity is achieved for masses
larger than 700 MeV. The successful operation of the
milliQan demonstrator and search carried out have shown
the feasibility of a dedicated detector for millicharged
particles at the LHC and provided important lessons for
the design of the full detector.
We congratulate our colleagues in the CERN accelerator
departments for the excellent performance of the LHC and
thank the technical and administrative staffs at CERN.
In addition, we gratefully acknowledge the CMS collabo-
ration for supporting this endeavor by providing invaluable
logistical and technical assistance. We also thank Eder
Izaguirre and Itay Yavin for their enduring contributions to
this idea. Finally, we acknowledge the following funding
agencies who support the investigators that carried out this
research in various capacities: FWO (Belgium) under the
Excellence of Science EOS be.h Project No. 30820817;
DFG and HGF (Germany); Swiss Funding Agencies
(Switzerland); STFC (United Kingdom); DOE and NSF
(USA); Lebanese University (Lebanon).
