Title:
Broader perspective on ecosystem
sustainability: Consequences for
decision making

Abstract:
Although the concept of ecosystem sustainability has a long-term focus, it is often viewed from a static system perspective. Because most
ecosystems are dynamic, we explore sustainability assessments from three additional perspectives: resilient systems; systems where tipping
points occur; and systems subject to episodic resetting. Whereas foundations of ecosystem resilience originated in ecology, recent discussions
have focused on geophysical attributes, and it is recognized that dynamic system components may not return to their former state following
perturbations.Tipping points emerge when chronic changes (typically anthropogenic, but sometimes natural) push ecosystems to thresholds
that cause collapse of process and function and may become permanent. Ecosystem resetting occurs when episodic natural disasters breach
thresholds with little or no warning, resulting in long-term changes to environmental attributes or ecosystem function. An example of
sustainability assessment of ecosystem goods and services along the Gulf Coast (USA) demonstrates the need to include both the resilient and
dynamic nature of biogeomorphic components. Mountain road development in northwest Yunnan, China, makes rivers and related habitat
vulnerable to tipping points. Ecosystems reset by natural disasters are also presented, emphasizing the need to understand the magnitude
frequency and interrelationships among major disturbances, as shown by (i) the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and resulting tsunami,
including how unsustainable urban development exacerbates geodisaster propagation, and (ii) repeated major earthquakes and associated
geomorphic and vegetation disturbances in Papua New Guinea. Although all of these ecosystem perturbations and shifts are individually
recognized, they are not embraced in contemporary sustainable decision making.

----------------------


Text:
----------------------
The concept of sustainability increasingly
permeates government, academic, and
private-sector organizational mantras. Sus-
tainability is de?ned in many ways, but a
common thread lies in its goal of harmo-
nizing environmental, economic, and so-
cial opportunities for the bene?t of present
and future generations (1–4). In ecosystem
research and management, the underlying
foundations of environmental sustainability
are system attributes—biosphere, hydro-
sphere, geosphere, and atmosphere, and
the linkages among them. Superimposed
on these natural ecosystem attributes is the
human component, consisting of humans
themselves, their economies, institutions,
infrastructures, cultures, and related land
use (5–7).
Belief in the balance of nature gave rise
to early ecological concepts such as carry-
ing capacity and maximum sustained yield,
which view ecosystems as permanent in
form and structure that strive to recover to
an “equilibrium” state following distur-
bances (8–10); thus, much thought and
research have been invested in incorporat-
ing the concept of resilience into sustainabil-
ity assessments (11–13). Resilience addresses
the ability of ecosystems to absorb change
and disturbance and adapt to small-scale
perturbations, both in the length of time
it takes to recover from external stress
and in the magnitude of stress from which
a system can recover without rapidly moving
to a new stable condition (7, 14). While
many resilience concepts evolved from
ecology (15), resilience has relevance to
other ecosystem characteristics, such as
the sustainability of surface water (16–18)
and groundwater (19). Although perturbed
ecosystems and components do not always
return to the exact state before a distur-
bance, there is a recognized bound on the
breadth of resilience (20): if a system is
viewed as resilient, it is generally perceived
as remaining within speci?ed “bounds.”
While this notion of an essentially ?nite
system is accepted even by critics of sus-
tainable development (21), the concepts of
permanent ecosystem change are typically
absent from sustainability discussions.
Tipping points are encountered one step
beyond ecosystem resilience and represent
thresholds that, when crossed, result in
catastrophic collapse of processes or func-
tions that are extremely dif?cult to restore.
These tipping points are closely associated
with complex system behavior where small
and cumulative anthropogenic and/or nat-
ural stressors push ecosystems toward critical
transitions, causing an abrupt shift from one
state to another (16, 22, 23). Negative tipping
points are applied to projected collapses in
ecosystems related to climate change (24),
climate anomalies (25), and land-use change
(26). In most scenarios, protracted dis-
turbance or stress causes the system to
lose resilience, followed by an abrupt al-
teration in state once the tipping point is
exceeded (27). Positive tipping points may
occur when interventions in degraded eco-
systems allow processes and populations to
recover with the help of human innova-
tion (28).
A different kind of threshold is crossed
when episodic natural disasters affect eco-
systems. These are reached suddenly with
little or no warning, and the resulting im-
pacts on ecosystems can be dramatic and
far-reaching (16). Examples include the
devastating 2011 earthquake-tsunami di-
saster in eastern Japan (29); lahars ema-
nating from the 1985 volcanic activity at
Nevado del Ruiz, Colombia (30); climate
change-induced glacial dam collapse and
jökulhlaups in the Karakoram Himalaya
(31); isostatic rebound in the Copper River
Delta, Alaska, following the Great Alaska
Earthquake of 1964 that caused a seaward
shift in the salt marsh (32); and massive
landslides in central China during a major
earthquake in 1920 (33). These were all ex-
treme events, but more frequent disasters of
smaller magnitude can also in?ict long-
term ecosystem resetting, albeit at smaller
scales. Although it is dif?cult to predict the
timing and areal extent of sudden, episodic
disasters, probabilistic hazard maps, assess-
ments, and predictive models can help guide
sustainabilityanalysis and thus reduce risk in
vulnerable regions (34–36). Furthermore,
knowledge gained from episodic disasters
can help break down barriers based on past
experiences and ideas and reframe future
decisions by noticing and bracketing new ev-
idence, working cognitively to elucidate in-
terconnected processes, and retaining this
knowledge (37).
Because ecosystems are intrinsically linked
to dynamic earth system properties, con-
fusion persists about what sustainable
ecosystems and management practices are.
Vulnerability analysis links sustainability
and the stressors and perturbations that in-
teract within resilient ecosystems and their
socioeconomic counterparts (6, 38), but
challenges to connecting sustainability with
episodic threshold changes remain (10, 16).
Given that an inherent tenet of sustainabil-
ity is long-term viability of ecosystem func-
tion, better focus needs to be placed on the
natural resources that form the backbone
of these systems—their spatial and temporal
attributes and resilience—and how anthro-
pogenic and natural stressors compromise
system resilience, breach tipping points,
and cause episodic change.
Including sustainability in ecosystem re-
search and assessment requires fundamen-
tal knowledge of earth system dynamics at
appropriate scales to assess future trajecto-
ries of rural and community development,
food security, disaster mitigation, reclamation,
infrastructure, site productivity, hazardous
waste disposal, water use, and contaminant
transport. Once spatial and temporal scales
of sustainability are de?ned, ecosystem
attributes must be carefully articulated. Be-
cause sustainability has a long-term focus,
ecosystem resilience should be incorporated
into these attributes (6, 14, 18, 20, 27, 38)
(Fig. 1). Chronic agents of ecosystem change,
such as soil development, disease, and eco-
logical succession, are accommodated by
resiliency, as are minor episodic events (e.g.,
small earthquakes, ?oods, wild?res).
In cases where long-term anthropogenic
pressures such as forest conversion, wetland
destruction, overhunting/over?shing, poor
irrigation practices, and overgrazing have
impacted ecosystems, tipping points in sys-
tems may be reached. Chronic disturbances
or changes may exhaust ecosystem resil-
ience, leading to a rapid change of state
(7, 27, 39). Anthropogenic perturbations can
also lower the initiation threshold for certain
natural disasters (40–42), complicating ex-
ceedance thresholds for ecosystem change.
Furthermore, when major episodic processes
exceed thresholds of resilience, they may
reset ecosystem attributes (16) (Fig. 1). For
example, sustainable development in cities
such as San Francisco and Tokyo must
consider how major earthquakes may alter
topography, coastal conditions, and vegeta-
tion, and how ecosystem resilience accom-
modates chronic changes such as sea-level
rise and vegetation change induced by global
climate change. This decision making can be
improved by adapting and learning from
past experiences such as natural disasters or
more subtle signs of resilience loss (14, 37).
Dynamic ecosystem attributes also affect
how we assess sustainable management of
rural lands. Widespread conversion of trop-
ical forests to cultivated agriculture, planta-
tions, pasture, residential developments, and
recreational use has led to increased erosion,
water stress, nutrient depletion, and loss of
biodiversity (43–45). Although chronic eco-
system shifts are often the focus of sustain-
ability assessments, we need to understand
how land uses exacerbate episodic processes
such as landslides, ?oods, wild?res, and
droughts that can reshape systems. Several
examples are presented in the next section
illustrating how management decisions
could bene?t from broader sustainability
assessments.
Understanding the potential for natural
change in ecosystems is essential not only to
the environmental “pillar” of sustainability
but also to economic and social compo-
nents. The natural system, along with eco-
nomic and social counterparts, shapes and
in?uences the well-being of individuals, so-
cieties, and ecosystems, both now and in
the future (2, 10, 14, 46). For individuals,
meeting basic needs such as food, shelter,
and health maintenance is a prerequisite to
economic and social well-being. These are
met through adequate access to health care,
employment, and education. Well-being
for ecological systems can be de?ned using
concepts similar to those for humans. The
quality and quantity of habitat, including
all facets required for survival, mainte-
nance, and proliferation of populations and
ecological functions, are analogous to hu-
man “wealth.” Although nonhuman species
and their ecological systems are unlikely to
be as aware of their own well-being as
humans, drawing the parallel between well-
being of humans and nonhumans recog-
nizes interconnections among the natural,
economic, and social components of sus-
tainability (46). If, for example, a major
power plant or toxic waste repository is sited
in an area that has potential for episodic
system change (e.g., major earthquake,
?ooding), there are strong implications for
both economics and society. More gradual
changes that fall within the resilience ca-
pacity of ecosystems may test the limits of
societal adaptability and may incur signi?-
cant economic costs to cope. A prominent
example of gradual environmental change
is the effect of sea-level rise on coastal eco-
systems and communities (47). A socio-
economic dilemma is that huge investments
continue to be made in increasingly vul-
nerable coastal areas when a philosophy of
adaptation should be encouraged instead
(48). In such cases, although the ecosystems
themselves may be resilient, socioeconomic
issues are driving the sustainability agenda.
As noted, most ecosystem sustainability
assessments are conducted within static or,
at best, resilient settings. Few assessments
consider the potential for tipping points,
such as induced by climate change or
land degradation. Even greater challenges to
sustainability arise when system thresholds
are exceeded because of natural disasters or
episodic environmental change (16). Exam-
ples exist where sustainability assessments
for land, coastal, energy, and industrial de-
velopment are satisfactory for static or
resilient ecosystems but become highly
problematic when subtle anthropogenic or
natural pressures push systems to tipping
points or when thresholds are exceeded
due to episodic change. Here we present
four cases where resilience, tipping points, or
ecosystem resetting should be considered in
sustainability assessments. Key environmen-
tal issues and attributes of each system, along
withnatural andanthropogenic stressors, are
detailed in TableS1 with suggestedcorrective
measures that support sustainability.
Mexico. Gulf of Mexico ecosystems are es-
sential to regional socioeconomics, and pro-
vide a foundation for rare,unique,and valued
?shand wildlifespecies.Gulf Coast estuaries
and wetlands are feeding, spawning, and
nursery habitats for a rich assemblage of ?sh
and wildlife, including shorebirds, colonial
nesting birds, and migratory waterfowl. How-
ever, increasing population pressures in the
Gulf of Mexico create increased use of and
demands on Gulf resources (Table S1).
Given the variety of ecosystem services
provided on the Gulf Coast, including com-
mercial and sport ?sheries, biodiversity, and
recreation, we must understand how they
interact with dynamic coastal features. For
example, barrier islands, wetlands, sloughs,
and the coastline itself collectively form a
natural defense against landfall hurricanes
as well as buffer the coast from ?oodwaters
emanating from rivers (49). These features
also provide diverse habitats for an array of
?sh and other marine resources. An impor-
tant aspect of this complex system that is
often overlooked in development, manage-
ment, and restoration efforts is the transient
nature of the biogeomorphic attributes. Al-
though delta building is a progressive process
(50), once these sites are developed, we tend
to view the systems as static and attempt to
force them to prior conditions following
extreme natural events. Similarly, barrier is-
lands, beaches, reefs, and mainland shorelines
are naturally dynamic, responding to major
storms and sea-level rise (51, 52). Anthro-
pogenic activities exacerbate coastal system
dynamics, including coastal development;
dredging sediments from rivers; enhanced
riverine ?ood ?ows from development; in-
creased nutrient ?uxes and oxygen depletion;
sea-level rise due to subsidence and climate
change; coastal erosion control structures;
and alteration of vegetation (50, 53–56).
Turning a blind eye toward biogeo-
morphic processes within coastal systems
poses dif?culties in separating anthropo-
genic effects from natural phenomena, and
can misguide restoration efforts. As such,
there are strong implications for the lu-
crative commercial and recreational ?shing
industry along the Gulf Coast. A recent
report from a federal advisory group (57)
emphasizes balancing ecosystem sustain-
ability and resilience with other priorities
(e.g., navigation and structural ?ood con-
trol) in restoration efforts. Nevertheless, these
proposed tradeoffs would bene?t in the long
term by recognizing natural dynamics of
barrier islands and coastal features in this
complex ecosystem, as well as how such
changes and resilience can affect ?sheries
and other ecological services.
Signi?cant restoration efforts along the
Gulf Coast have focused on coastal regions of
the Mississippi Deltaic and Chenier Plains,
where wetlands are being lost to the sea. In
Louisiana, 4,877 km2 have been lost since the
1930s, comprising 80% of US coastal wetland
losses (58, 59). Land loss in Louisiana has
been called a “national emergency,” with
up to 4,533 km2 threatened under status
quo management (59). Louisiana wetlands
are signi?cant to the welfare of the United
States—?80% of Louisiana ?sheries species
use wetlands for nurseries and 75% of
?sheries landings in the Gulf of Mexico are
adjacent to Louisiana (60). Moreover, in-
land ?ooding from storm surges, exacer-
bated by loss of wetlands, swamps, and
barrier islands, threatens property, people,
infrastructure, and unique cultural heritages
(59). On average, Gulf Coast communities
lose $14 billion annually from storms, which
could be compounded to $350 billion by in-
creased development and land loss (61).
Both natural and human factors have led
to wetland loss in Louisiana (62). Processes
identi?ed in wetland losses range from eu-
static sea-level rise and delta construction or
destruction to modi?cations such as failed
reclamation projects, canal construction, and
impoundments (63). Subsidence from natu-
ral compaction and restricted sediment input
caused by levees frequently leads to wetland
loss (62), but debates about the strength of
the effects of natural and anthropogenic
factors on land-loss rates are ongoing. Loca-
tions and time periods with exceedances of
natural geological subsidence rates might
identify where some anthropogenic stressors
have accelerated wetlands loss (64). A recent
study found that decadal changes in sub-
sidence rates trended with hydrocarbon ex-
traction, indicating a historical in?uence of
the latter on accelerated loss of wetlands in
some areas (65).
Wetland restoration and risk reduction
measures are being implemented to prevent
future,as well asredress past, losses to human
and wildlife habitat. Management options
being developed and applied in wetlands re-
newal and land building initiatives include
large-scale river diversions, marsh terracing,
sediment-slurry additions, plantings, dam
modi?cations, shoreline protection, sediment
fences, and placement of dredged materials
(59,66–68). Major river diversionsarecritical
to supplying sediment and nutrients, pre-
cipitating sul?des, and preventing saltwater
intrusion in coastal wetlands, but require
understanding of diverse considerations dur-
ing implementation (59, 66). For example,
positive and negative ancillary impacts on
a range of attributes including eutrophica-
tion, hazardous algal blooms, and salinity
changes in estuaries could occur from di-
version discharges (60, 66, 68). Restoration
decisions require understanding dynamic
sur?cial and subsidence processes (63). Salt
marsh areas can reach such a low vertical
elevation threshold that management must
focus on complete rebuilding (69). The ef-
fectiveness and uncertainties oflandbuilding
and sustaining projects forkeeping pace with
sea-level rise, subsidence, and other factors
are being both investigated and questioned.
For example, predictive modeling has shown
that sea-level rise and subsidence could
outpace many of the bene?ts from sediment
delivery, especially if river sediment loads
are not restored to levels before damming
(70). However, immediate initiation of proj-
ects to optimally decrease land loss and/or
move communities away from danger is
needed because of the increased future costs of
delayingtheseefforts due to uncertainties(70).
The importance of improving decision
making and learning capabilities in the
Gulf region has spurred recent activities
by private, federal, state, tribal, local, and
nongovernmental entities. The Gulf Coast
Restoration Task Force, established by
executive order to address long-term Gulf-
wide restoration beyond the 2010 oil spill,
has identi?ed tipping points as one critical
learning need (58). Efforts of a Science
Coordination Team expanded ideas in this
report (58) to include additional actions
for increasing resiliency in habitat types
and coastal communities (71). Focused
work on coastal sustainability and safety
issues has culminated in the most recent
Louisiana Coastal Master Plan (59), which
assesses scienti?c and value-based needs for
land-loss prevention decisions, including
resiliency-related issues (Fig. 2). For deci-
sions addressing land losses, considerations
include ecosystems services (e.g., ?sheries
and nature-based tourism), socioeconomic
issues (e.g., protecting strategic assets and
signi?cant cultural sites), and threats to re-
siliency (e.g., sea-level rise and invasive spe-
cies) (59). De?ning variables and criteria that
impact stakeholders and ecological viability,
along with other important factors such as
causal relationsand uncertainties, will support
management efforts to achieve desired and
avoid undesired outcomes.
Due to the magnitude of the land-loss
crisis, improved governance capabilities for
deriving, using, and exchanging process
knowledge across scales of decision making
is being implemented. The Coastal Protec-
tion and Restoration Authority (CPRA) was
established to coordinate planning, imple-
mentation, and enforcement for restoring
and protecting coastal Louisiana (59). De-
velopment of CPRA management plans in-
volves community stakeholders, industry
representatives, government of?cials, and
experts. The CPRA organizes teams to im-
plement selected projects, including evalu-
ating and addressing design considerations,
implementation barriers, and regional con-
sequences, and develops an adaptive man-
agement framework to foster participatory
bene?ts from collaboration, coordination,
and communication (59).
Ensuring resilience in complex environ-
ments with multiple stressors requires man-
agement that is ?exible and responsive to
new information. Elements of structured
decision making can be adapted for highly
dynamic environments including frequently
reexamining objectives, adapting manage-
ment actions to changes, and incorporating
model uncertainty into predictions (72).
Although private and public decision makers
work to prevent shifts from desirable to un-
desirable ecosystem states, consideration of
the dynamic and varied nature of Gulf
Coast ecosystems could improve man-
agement in all phases of decisions. Im-
proving the decision-making process also
requires a critical appraisal of the collection,
interpretation, use, and communication of
knowledge on ecological and social dy-
namics at all scales of governance. In addi-
tion to understanding the dynamic nature of
Gulf ecosystems, addressing concerns of
community members is essential to make
informed tradeoffs in large-scale restoration
projects.
in both surface and landslide erosion caused
by road construction in the mountains of
northwest Yunnan, China, affect not only site
productivity but also exacerbate sediment
delivery to rivers (73). Unimproved roads are
proliferating in this developing region due
primarily to economic and tourism pressures
(74, 75). This region is home of the Three
Parallel Rivers of Yunnan Protected Areas,
designated by the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scienti?c, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) as a World Heritage site. In this
unique geologic and ecological area, the Jin-
sha, Salween, and Mekong Rivers run ap-
proximately parallel in deep gorges within
less than a 100-km wide corridor. Sediments
routed into the Salween and Mekong Rivers
and their tributaries eventually ?ow through
poorer nations (Myanmar, Thailand, Laos,
and Cambodia) that depend on these waters
for ?shing, aquaculture, irrigation, and other
livelihoods. In addition to degrading site
productivity and water quality, sediments
impact aquatic habitat, damage hydropower
facilities, and transfer pollutants. Excessive
sediment deposition in steeper headwaters
may also increase the potential for ?ooding
and catastrophic debris ?ows (76). The larg-
est sediment inputs from mountain roads to
rivers do not emanate from surface erosion
but from landslides (Fig. 3A). Landslide ero-
sion along recently constructed roads in these
mountains varies from about 3,000–48,000
Mg·ha?1·y?1 (74), values that dwarf aver-
age landslide erosion rates along forest
roads in unstable terrain in the northwest
USA (60 Mg·ha?1·y?1), which were suf?-
cient to suspend forest-logging operations
on federal lands due to concerns over
aquatic habitat (40). Surface erosion from
and along these roads, although signi?cant,
is typically <10% of the landslide erosion.
Oftentimes, >80% of the landslide and sur-
face-eroded sediments directly reach stream
and river systems (Fig. 3B) (76).
Thus, a more sustainable approach to rural
road development in Yunnan would be to
consider potential landslides as the primary
sediment source and to evaluate alternatives
for road location, construction, and structural
and nonstructural protection against end uses
and socioeconomic bene?ts. Many newly
constructed roads in northeastern Yunnan
are inoperable during wet seasons or require
extensive maintenance to remove landslide
sediment, which eventually makes its way
into rivers. In the worst cases, mountain road
construction is abandoned, leaving no access
and a legacy of sedimentation problems.
Examples of landslide-related deaths along
these lightly traveled mountain routes have
already been reported (76). Current de-
velopment is paying little attention to road
location or construction methods to control
the mass wasting of rock and soil (40). These
secondary roads are typically constructed
with hydraulic shovels, back hoes, or in-
discriminate blasting, and the excavated
material is simply disposed of onto slopes
below the road. Much of the terrain is very
steep (>30°) with few breaks in gradient,
and thus once a landslide initiates along a
road there is little chance of sediment en-
trapment on the slope. Until urgent attention
is directed toward this problem, local resi-
dents and downstream communities will bear
the burden of such unsustainable practices,
not to mention damage to fragile terrestrial
and aquatic habitats.
This example shows how ecosystems could
be pushed to tipping points because of poor
management decisions. Consequences that
have appeared or could develop include (i)
extensive road-related landslides and surface
erosion that progressively strip soil to the
point where vegetation is altered and habi-
tation downslope is unsafe; (ii) degraded
water quality exerting long-term downstream
impacts; (iii) catastrophic debris ?ows in
sediment-laden headwaters; and (iv) impacts
on livelihoods or economies of downstream
water users. An effective sustainability as-
sessment before extensive road construction
and other land development activities in this
mountainous region should include land-
slide hazard assessments and analysis of
potential trigger mechanisms with proba-
bility thresholds for different road locations
and construction methods (Fig. 4). Ac-
ceptable levels of landslide and surface
erosion need to be articulated, as well as
thresholds that equate to tipping points,
that is, where site productivity, human wel-
fare, ecological attributes, or river conditions
are severely impacted in the long term.
Management activities (e.g., road build-
ing) could be constrained to options that
would not approach tipping points.
complex cascade of damage in the Paci?c
coastal region of Tohoku, Japan, was initially
triggered by the March 11, 2011, Great East
Japan Earthquake. This was the largest earth-
quake ever measured in Japan in terms of
ground motion, magnitude(M = 9.0),shaking
duration, and magnitude and number of
aftershocks. Much of the coastal damage oc-
curred when a huge tsunami, with run-up
heights exceeding 39 m in some areas, struck
within 30–40 min of the earthquake (29) (Fig.
5A). Even with the most advanced tsunami
warning system in the world, a large per-
centageofthe20,000+lives lostinthis disaster
was directly attributed to tsunami impacts.
The tsunami inundateddikes and breakwaters
along the coast, bringing into question the
protective value of such countermeasures for
truly episodic events. On one hand, it can be
argued that these countermeasures (although
breached) ameliorated the extent of tsunami
damage; on the other, a case can be made that
such measures may lead to a false sense of
security for residents and that emphasizing
disaster prevention education is more effec-
tive, particularly in a nation where residents
are aware of such hazards (29).
Along with the lives that were lost during
this composite disaster, extensive infrastruc-
ture damage occurred including roads, rail-
ways, arti?cial ?lls, lifelines, and earthen
dam collapse, and some 76,000 homes were
destroyed (Fig. 5). Although reinforced con-
crete structures mitigated some of the dam-
age (77), the combination of earthquake and
subsequent tsunami waves lique?ed foun-
dation materials and actually toppled many
reinforced structures (Fig. 5C). Associated
“natural” disasters affected by the earth-
quake/tsunami included ?res, landslides, and
debris ?ows. The largest long-term conse-
quence of the disaster is the accident at the
Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant No. 1. After
the earthquake, the two most-affected nu-
clear reactors were shut down successfully;
however, earthquake damage to the electrical
feeder lines required that backup generators
supply power to emergency cooling systems
for the reactors. Within less than 1 h,
the backup generators were inundated by
the tsunami surge, causing power loss to the
cooling systems. Subsequent actions taken to
deal with the system failures resulted in a
release of radioactive material into the en-
vironment. The regional deposition of radi-
oisotopes may have long-term implications
for agricultural production and land use
throughout coastal Fukushima Prefecture
and neighboring regions (78). Furthermore,
evidence exists that cesium has penetrated
the bark of Japanese cedar (the most im-
portant regional commercial tree species)
to the extent that it may have contaminated
wood to be used in housing and furniture
construction. The Fukushima government
is attempting to mitigate economic impacts
of the disaster by supporting the local
forest industry, thus exacerbating this con-
tamination problem.
This catastrophic set of disasters underlines
thenecessity forconcurrent hazardanalysis in
sustainability assessments and decision mak-
ing. The cumulative cascade of disasters—
earthquakes, tsunami, landslides/debris ?ows,
?res, radioactive releases from damaged
power plants—emphasizes the need to base
environmental safeguards on joint probabili-
ties of the occurrence of multiple, interrelated
hazards in dynamic settings. Siting criteria
and contingency plans for facilities such as
nuclear power plants that pose severe envi-
ronmental risks if compromised must care-
fully consider the range and interaction of
geohazards. Whereas the vulnerable sub-
duction zone off Japan’s east coast is known
for its earthquake potential, the combination
of episodic effects that occurred on March 11,
2011, together with power outages, were not
anticipated in the siting and emergency
planning of the Fukushima power plants.
The radioactive releases that followed now
bring into question the need for contin-
gency planning that could anticipate such
human and environmental exposures (in
time and space) and how to proceed with
managing contaminated areas (79, 80). By
reinterpreting planning and response strat-
egies based on experiences gained during
this multifaceted disaster, decision makers
can learn ways of promoting more sustain-
able approaches of mitigating risk (37). Al-
though human health must be of paramount
concern, related issues include soil and
water contamination and equitable com-
pensation to owners of contaminated areas,
as well as science-based decisions on future
land-use trajectories in affected regions. In
hindsight, sustainability assessments in tec-
tonically active coastal settings should con-
sider such low-frequency, high-magnitude
events and weigh the risks of siting vul-
nerablefacilities there.Additionally,assess-
ments must evaluate long-term ecosystem
changes that follow uplift, subsidence, coast-
line alterations, and sedimentation (81, 82).
In the shadow of the damage caused by
tsunami waves, more than 200 residential lots
in Sendai City were impacted (Fig. 5B).
Among these, at least 50 residential lots were
damaged by landslides in the urban region,
and several hundred houses were destroyed
by landslides, all of which were associated
with arti?cial landforms, especially valley ?lls
(embankments), created during residential
development on slopes (83) (Fig. 5B). In-
frequent, very large magnitude earthquakes
(M ? 8) have occurred off the eastern coast
of Japan, but smaller major earthquakes
(M ? 7) have struck much closer to the
mainland with greater frequency and caused
more severe damage in this urban region. In
particular, the 1978 Miyagi Prefecture Off
Shore Earthquake (M = 7.4) disaster was the
?rst case of a modern urban complex affected
by a major earthquake (84). Before this
earthquake, Japan had experienced several
decades of postwar growth (1954–1973) that
affected socioeconomic conditions and in-
creased the demand for labor and housing in
large cities, such as Sendai City. Concur-
rently, energy sources evolved from charcoal
to fossil fuels, eliminating harvesting of for-
ests around the urban area. Even after the
1978 earthquake, Sendai City continued to
expand in response to population growth,
especially during the bubble economy from
the mid-1980s through the early 1990s, with
large numbers of residential lots being con-
structed on surrounding hillsides. Crests of
hills were removed and valleys were ?lled by
soils from cuts and industrial waste. The poor
quality of ?lls and degraded subsurface
water drainage were major contributors to
the widespread valley ?ll landslides that
occurred in the urban region during the
2011 earthquake (83). In contrast, smaller
cities in Japan experienced less population
growth, thus precluding the need for ex-
tensive ?ll construction for residential lots
on hillsides. As such, the population dy-
namics and urban development in the
Tohoku region during the past half-century
were re?ected in the distribution of urban
landslides induced by the 2011 earthquake
(83). Current government relocation of
coastal communities to inland hillsides is
designed to provide safe residential/business
sites as well as bolster the devastated local
economy. However, cuts and ?lls used to
implement this massive relocation exemplify
how power relations and mismatches of
informational ?ows create a scenario where
government decision makers ignore lessons
from past experiences instead of retaining
this knowledge and acting accordingly (37).
The disproportional number of landslides
that occurred in arti?cial valley ?lls during
the 1995 Kobe earthquake further highlights
the need to avoid residential ?lls and opt for
more sustainable alternatives such as building
“contour line cities,” with houses distributed
along topographic contours to reduce the
cascading linkage between development and
landslides in hilly urban regions (85).
tinual natural disturbances (e.g., earthquakes,
volcanism, tectonic uplift, landslides) in the
mountains of Papua New Guinea have cre-
ated an ecosystem in a kind of “dynamic
equilibrium.” An estimated 8–16% of New
Guinea’s tropical forests are disturbed every
century by earthquakes and related landslides
(86). Earlier studies in a portion of this ter-
rain revealed that large single earthquakes in
1935 (M = 7.9) and 1970 (M = 7.0) denuded
8% and 25% of affected forested areas (130
and 60 km2), respectively (87, 88). An addi-
tional 3% of the New Guinea landscape is
disturbed by landslides not associated with
earthquakes—mostly initiated by the high
rainfall (2,500–6,000 mm·y?1) that exhibits
strong but spatially variable seasonal cycles.
Natural episodic disturbances maintain large
areas of successional forest that, in the ab-
sence of these disturbances, would even-
tually be replaced by other tree species (86).
Extraction of natural resources further exacer-
bates terrain instability and resultant forest
composition. Timber harvesting, mining, en-
ergy development, and associated infrastruc-
ture all affect the stability of steep slopes (40).
Because earthquake-initiated landslides are
more common on steep hillsides and ridge-
lines (40), these sites are where vegetation dis-
turbance is most prominent. Rainfall-initiated
landslidestypicallyoccuronsteepslopes,aswell
as in concave depressions (hollows) where
shallowgroundwaterconcentrates(40),butnot
along ridgelines. The ecosystem resetting asso-
ciated with these different mechanisms and
topographic features, therefore, should be in-
cluded in sustainability assessments.
The juxtaposing forces and in?uences of
rapid tectonic uplift and denudation by mass
erosion and other sur?cial processes are
evident in the development of drainage
networks in this geologically youthful ter-
rain. The early phase of rapid tectonic uplift
creates a pre–steady-state evolution of to-
pography in Papua New Guinea that can be
characterized by the following sequences in
the Finisterre Mountains: (i) watershed ini-
tiation in isolated gorges in terrain with
subdued relief where drainages are created
by dissolution processes and tectonic up-
lift dominates erosion; (ii) watershed ex-
pansion where mass wasting (landslides
controlled by groundwater seepage) rap-
idly supplies sediment to streams, which
accelerates channel erosion, lowers valleys,
and steepens topography; (iii) tributary ex-
pansion by slope-clearing landslides along
valley sides; and (iv) stream entrenchment
due to runoff concentration and associated
?uvial incision of landslide scars and de-
posits (89). Each unique setting must be
recognized in sustainability assessments of
land use in this dynamic terrain, especially
in how management decisions affect stream
channel morphology, erosion, and sediment
transport. Treating responses to manage-
ment decisions similarly for these dif-
ferent geomorphic settings is fraught with
problems.
Ecosystems are impacted by natural and
anthropogenic stressors. Resilience in these
systems accommodates certain levels of
both stressor types and should be consid-
ered to properly frame ecosystem assess-
ments. A more dif?cult issue occurs when
stressors push systems to tipping points,
causing a regime shift. Whereas chronic
anthropogenic activities such as progressive
soildegradation, land-cover change,and air
pollution are often linked to tipping points
(25, 39), natural changes can also push
systems totheir limits (16, 24). Recognizing
tipping points and implementing strategies
to avoid (in terms of anthropogenic stres-
sors) or cope (in the case of natural stres-
sors) is a challenge that requires thorough
understanding of ecosystem processes and
responses to stressors. Cumulative-effects
analysis can help separate effects of an-
thropogenic activities from those of natural
processes and is useful in sustainability
assessments (90).
The most dif?cult ecosystems to assess for
sustainability are those predisposed to epi-
sodic natural disasters—major earthquakes,
tsunami, large landslides, widespread wild?re,
and volcanic activity—that can reset entire
systems for long periods. Oftentimes, major
events initiate a cascade of linked disasters, as
in the case of the 2011 Great East Japan
Earthquake, where tsunami, ?res, landslides,
?llslope collapses, radioactive releases, and
associated health effects occurred. Such dis-
asters are often devastating because lack of
warning inhibits response, and the infrequent
nature of these events precludes the in-
corporation of past episodes into contempo-
rary decision making (14, 37). Capturing the
probability of ecosystem resetting in sustain-
ability assessments is necessary, as evidenced
by recent disasters throughout Asia and
North America.
A paradigm shift is required for us to
embrace concepts of sustainability and ex-
plore the consequences of decision making
that affects human and ecosystem integrity.
Harmonizing environmental, economic, and
social opportunities for the bene?t of present
and future generations creates an opportu-
nity to understand the in?uence of inherent
chemical, geophysical, and social attrib-
utes and stressors on human health and
ecological integrity. It is further recog-
nized that whereas underestimating the
impact of certain stressors and related
exposures may result in contamination or
adverse health effects, overestimating the
potential hazards could create an eco-
nomic burden on communities. Land-
management and regulatory agencies of-
ten rely on indicators of sustainability in
ecosystems (3, 91, 92), but it is important
to understand how anthropogenic and
natural ecosystem processes force changes
in system behavior as well as the goods
and services they provide (16, 24, 90).
