Title:
Modeling Solute Transport in the WinSRFR
Surface Irrigation Software

Abstract:
 A solute transport model has been added to the WinSRFR surface irrigation software package. The model uses advective- dispersive principles to predict the flow of solute with the irrigation stream and its final longitudinal distribution along the field based on water flow predictions generated by the simulation engine. Computations are based on the fractional stepping method: advection is computed using the method of characteristics from the velocity field computed by the simulation engine water flow calculations, and dispersion is calculated from the advection results using a centered-difference finite-difference scheme. The Akima interpolation scheme was used to build the method-of-characteristics solution. The computations are robust and execute in little time. The accuracy of the model was evaluated with numerical tests and by comparison with field measurements. Results suggest that the model can generate useful predictions under typical irrigation conditions. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0001507. © 2020 Published by American Society of Civil Engineers. 
----------------------


Text:
----------------------
A common practice in surface irrigation is the application of nitro-
gen fertilizer with the irrigation stream. In principle, fertigation pro-
motes high nutrient recovery by the crop and reduces the potential
for nutrient leaching below the root zone because it facilitates the
application closer to development stages with high nutrient de-
mand. This is difficult to do with mechanical fertilizer application
systems. However, effective fertigation practices require an irriga-
tion system with excellent distribution uniformity and application
efficiency. Moreover, even with an efficient water application, nu-
trient distribution along the length of the field and vertically within
the soil profile can be poor if the timing of the nutrient injection
relative to the flow of the irrigation stream is inadequate (Playan
and Faci 1997). In furrow irrigation systems, where infiltration is
two-dimensional, water and fertilizer distribution can be further
affected by irrigation system management variables such as flow
depth (Abbasi et al. 2003a) or the use of alternate furrow irrigation
(Ebrahimian et al. 2013).
Because of the need to understand and manage the distribution
of nutrients applied through surface irrigation systems, solute
transport modeling tools have been under development for over
20 years. This development is closely linked to the development
of tools for modeling surface irrigation flows, as well as tools
for modeling the movement of water and solutes within the soil
profile. The development discussed herein deals only with model-
ing the transport of solute with the surface and flow and its ultimate
distribution along the length of the field.
The flow of fertilizer with the irrigation stream is a special case
of advective-dispersive transport. Advection refers to the move-
ment of solutes with the mean velocity of the conveying fluid,
and thus as a result of the mean forces acting on that flow, whereas
dispersion considers the transport and mixing of the solute as a re-
sult of velocity gradients within a cross section, flow turbulence,
and molecular diffusion. Numerous studies have discussed the prin-
ciples of advective-dispersive transport in open-channel water
flows (e.g., Fischer et al. 1979; Cunge et al. 1980). The analysis
assumes a neutrally buoyant solute and relatively small concentra-
tions. These conditions imply that the solute has no effect on the
density of the water and, consequently, on the irrigation flow. The
analysis also assumes that the constituent is not subject to chemical
reactions and that the only sink is the solute lost via infiltration. If
the solute is applied in a pulse of short duration relative to the water
flow event of interest, dispersion causes the concentration of the
pulse to spread and attenuate as it travels downstream.
Solving the problem of solute advection-dispersion in surface
irrigation also requires solving the unsteady surface-flow problem
coupled to infiltration. Solution methods that have been developed
for the combined problem can be grouped in three categories. The
simplest but least accurateapproach decouples the one-dimensional
irrigation flow calculations from the solute transport, with the for-
mer executed first to provide the computational grid for the latter
(Boldt et al. 1994; Playán and Faci 1997; Strelkoff et al. 2006).
Mass balance is used to track the fate of discrete parcels of water,
with or without solute, entering a field. The parcels are defined by
the time step of the irrigation simulation. Water entering the stream
during a time step pushes water already on the field further down-
stream and does not mix with it. Water is abstracted from the parcel
byinfiltration, with the calculations conducted using the cells of the
irrigation simulation, cell by cell. This requires the water flow cells
to be calculated with an Eulerian computational grid. The remain-
ing surface water is water that can flow downstream. The parcel is
tracked in subsequent time steps until all its water is exhausted.
Because calculations allow the solute to be transported only with
the bulk flow of water, they produce a reasonable approximation to
advective transport.
The second solution method also decouples the water and
solute flow calculations, but computes the latter with the partial
differential equation of advection-dispersion (ADE) (García-
Navarro et al. 2000; Abbasi et al. 2003b; Zerihun et al. 2005a;
Perea et al. 2010). This approach allows using different computa-
tional procedures for each of the two flow components and, there-
fore, allows superimposing the solute transport calculations on
an existing water flow model. As with the water flow equations,
the ADE equation can only be solved numerically for practical
problems. Solving the water and solute flow problems can fail
to properly conserve the solute, however (Murillo et al. 2005).
Furthermore, the ADE alone presents substantial computational
challenges. Because pure advection is described by a hyperbolic
partial differential equation whereas pure dispersion by a para-
bolic type equation, numerical solutions to the combined equation
can introduce numerical dispersion larger than the predicted
dispersion (Islam and Chaudhry 1997).
The fractional stepping method (also known as split operator)
was developed to mitigate this problem. In fractional stepping,
the advection component is computed first from the velocity field
computed by the water flow simulation by using the method of
characteristics to track the fate of particles introduced at the boun-
dary. Dispersion is calculated subsequently from the concentration
field computed by the advection solution. This splitting approach is
subject to a numerical error that is proportional to the calculation
time step (LeVeque 2002), Furthermore, because it requires many
interpolations, it can fail to properly conserve mass. Thus, different
variations of the method have been reported. Most decoupled fer-
tigation models have used fractional stepping to deal with the ADE
calculations (García-Navarro et al. 2000; Zerihun et al. 2005a;
Perea et al. 2010).
A third solution strategy consists of computing the water flow
and ADE equations simultaneously at every space and time step of
the calculations. Currently, the preferred approach for solving the
fully coupled problem is using finite-volume numerical procedures.
This approach has been used to model one-dimensional surface
flow cases with both borders and furrows (Burguete et al. 2009;
Zhang et al. 2016; Brunetti et al. 2018), and two-dimensional
border/basin irrigation (Dai et al. 2019). Finite-volume methods
were originally developed to model compressible flows, in which
shock waves can easily develop, and are therefore inherently better
suited for handling discontinuities in the solution and boundary
conditions than finite-difference methods. Because those methods
are computationally expensive in comparison with existing finite-
difference solutions, their application to modeling irrigation flows
is a topic of active research.
Perea et al. (2010) reported a solute transport model based on
the ADE and the fractional step solution method. This approach,
with modifications, has been added to the simulation the compo-
nent of WinSRFR version 5.1 (Bautista and Schlegel 2019), a
software package for the analysis of surface irrigations systems
developed by the USDA Agricultural Research Service. The de-
coupled solution takes advantage of the WinSRFR hydraulic sol-
ution, which runs prior to the advection-dispersion calculations.
This article documents the model and examines its strengths and
limitations.
Water Flow
SRFR 5, the simulation engine of WinSRFR (Bautista et al. 2016),
uses the zero-inertia form of the one-dimensional shallow-water
(depth-averaged) unsteady open-channel flow equations (Strelkoff
and Clemmens 2007) to model surface irrigation flows
Eq. (1) represents conservation of mass and states that the time
t (T) rate of change in the surface volume per unit length AyðL3=LÞ
is a function of the rate of change with distance x (L) of flow rate
QðL3=TÞ and the time rate of change of water loss due to infiltra-
tion AzðL3=LÞ. Eq. (2) represents conservation of linear momentum
but without the local and convection acceleration terms. Thus, the
gradient in hydrostatic pressure (gAy?y=?x) force and the weight
component of the water in the direction of flow (gAyS0) are in bal-
ance with the frictional resistance by the soil surface and vegetation
(gAySf). In this expression, g = acceleration of gravity (L=T2); y =
flow depth (L); S0 = field bottom slope (L/L); and Sf = friction
slope (L/L). The zero-inertia equations are reasonably accurate
in comparison with the full hydrodynamic equations flow at
low Froude numbers typical of irrigation flows (Strelkoff and
Clemmens 2007). Because they can represent the motion of waves
traveling both downstream and upstream, they can be applied to
free-draining and blocked-end irrigation systems.
When the slope is uniform and relatively steep (for practical
purposes, slopes greater than 0.004 m=m), the pressure gradient
term in Eq. (2) becomes negligible because normal flow conditions
are quickly attained. SRFR then replaces that equation with
The resulting kinematic wave equations are accurate in compari-
son with zero inertia under the previously described conditions but
can only be applied to free-draining systems because they can only
represent a wave traveling downstream.
The irrigation flow equations represent a coupled surface–
subsurface flow problem because of the infiltration term Az. SRFR
5 offers several options for representing infiltration (Bautista 2016;
Bautista and Schlegel 2019). Empirical equations assume that Az
is a function of opportunity time, i.e., the time of water contact with
the soil surface. When dealing with furrows, where infiltration is a
two-dimensional flow process, expressions are available for adjust-
ing the average intake as a function of a nominal inflow-rate-
dependent wetted perimeter. Infiltration can also be computed as
a function of soil hydraulic properties, initial soil water content,
and the variable water pressure at the soil surface, semiempirically,
with the Green-Ampt equation (borders/basins) and the Warrick-
Green-Ampt equation (furrows), or physically with the Richards
equation (only borders). Evidently, selection of an infiltration mod-
eling approach and parameterization of the selected equation play a
key role in predicting the surface flow of water, the final distribu-
tion of infiltrated water, and consequently, the infiltration of solute
along the fieldand vertically in the soil profile, but this critical issue
will not be addressed here.
Initial conditions for the water flow equations are
At the upstream boundary, the condition is the specified inflow
hydrograph Q0ðtÞ
Downstream boundary conditions are needed only when solving
the zero-inertia equations. During the advance phase, depth and
flowrate are nil at the advancing front xa
where tL = final advance time. After water reaches the end of the
field Lf, a depth-discharge relationship applies at the downstream
boundary for a free draining system
For a blocked system, the discharge is zero
Solute Flow
The conservative, depth-averaged ADE equation for one-
dimensional flow of a nonreactive solute in the irrigation stream is
where C = concentration (M/L3); v = cross-sectional averaged flow
velocity (L/T); Kx = coefficient of longitudinal dispersion (L2/T);
and Ay = surface flow area, as previously defined. This equation
states that the time rate of change of solute mass is a function
of the rate of change solute flux with distance, the solute lost to
infiltration, and solute dispersion (Cunge et al. 1980). The dispersion
coefficient represents the effect of velocity variations in the trans-
verse and vertical directions with respect to the cross-sectional aver-
aged velocity as well as the effect of turbulent mixing within a cross
section, which attenuates the effect of velocity variations. Thus, it is
the mechanism by which the three-dimensional transport process is
simplified to one dimension. Use of a Fick-type law to represent
dispersion [right-hand side of Eq. (9)] assumes that the soluteis fully
mixed within the cross section, a condition that is likely to be sat-
isfied in irrigated fields.
Eq. (9) can be simplified by expanding to
and using Eq. (1) to represent the infiltration sink term and substi-
tuting Q ¼ AV. The resulting nonconservative ADE is the equation
that has been used by previous authors (García-Navarro et al. 2000;
Zerihun et al. 2005a; Perea et al. 2010)
and the upper boundary conditions specified as follows:
where the inflow concentration C0ðtÞ is a function of solute solu-
tion injection rate, concentration in a supply tank, and water dis-
charge to the field. Downstream boundary conditions will be
discussed subsequently.
Zero-Inertia/Kinematic Wave Equations
Following Perea et al. (2010), the solution used herein decouples
the water and solute transport equations. Solution of the water flow
equations have been discussed by Walker and Skogerboe (1987),
Strelkoff (1990), Strelkoff and Clemmens (2007), and Bautista et al.
(2016). Details of those calculations will not be discussed here,
but it is relevant to this presentation to review the discretization
approach used by the SRFR simulation engine (i.e., the SRFR
dynamic-link library). SRFR solves the flow equations using an
Eulerian finite-difference scheme, with the spatial increment ini-
tially specified from the user-editable cell density parameter.
During the advance phase, the solution marches in time by advanc-
ing the stream to the next specified grid distance and, therefore,
solves for the time step. The space increments are not constant,
however, depending on spatial variations in field properties
(e.g., field elevation). Furthermore, the space step is reduced when-
ever the stream experiences substantial deceleration. In addition,
the code switches to solving for the advance distance with the time
increment known to enforce user-specified boundary conditions,
for example, changes in the inflow rate or solute injections.
During postadvance calculations, when the spatial grid is fully
defined, the solution can advance in principle using constant time
steps. However, as with the space steps, the time step is adjusted
depending on boundary conditions and computational situations,
for example, failure of the solution to converge. As a result, the
computational grid is irregular. The significance of this issue is that
numerical solutions to the ADE equation, such as the one discussed
subsequently, generally assume a uniform computational grid.
Advection Equation
The fractional stepping approach (LeVeque 2002) solves at each
time step the pure advection problem first
The solution to Eq. (14) is obtained by writing that expression as
follow:
By the chain rule of differentiation, this is the total derived of C
with respect to time, hence
dC ¼ 0
dt
along the characteristics curve given by
dx ¼ vðx; tÞ
dt
The solution to the advective problem consists, then, of tracing
the characteristic curves along which concentrations specified
with the boundary conditions travel unchanged.
Fig. 1. Calculation of a characteristic segment from the water solution
computational grid.
Fig. 1 shows the advection numerical solution. The figure rep-
resents two cells of thewater flow solution, which completes before
initiating the ADE calculations. Water flow variables, including
the cross-sectional average velocity, are known at each point ði; kÞ
of the rectangular grid and are available in computer memory.
At time i, concentration values are known at the spatial grid
points :: : ; k ? 1;k;k þ 1; ::: A solution is sought at the grid
point i þ 1, k þ 1 (Node A). The concentration at Node A depends
on the concentration at the point F, which is the foot of the char-
acteristic at the time i. Two possible characteristic segments are
shown in the figure. The one labeled Cc1 is entirely contained
within a grid cell, and the one labeled Cc2 spans two cells. Calcu-
lation of the concentration at F involves the following steps (Perea
et al. 2010).
A first-order finite-difference approximation to Eq. (18) is
This provides an expression for the location of the foot of the char-
acteristic xF
If the unknown velocity at F is expressed as a weighted average
of the velocities at nodes k and k þ i, then
Then, xF and vF can be determined by iterating through
Eqs. (20)–(22) until satisfying the convergence criterion
where j = iteration index; and tol = tolerance value. The procedure
is initialized by setting vF ¼ vC. This is all that is needed when F is
the foot of Cc1.
When dealing with a characteristics segment such as Cc2, the
calculations will force xF beyond xk (Node C). The procedure then
calculates the time tF0 at which the characteristic crosses xk, and
continues the search for the foot of the characteristic. Equations
like the ones used to located xF are used to find tF0
This alternate calculation is initialized with vE. The convergence
criterion is as in Eq. (23).
After solving for tF0, the search for xF can continue using
Eqs. (20)–(22) but with Nodes A, B, C, and D reassigned to their
new locations (e.g., Node F0 becomes the new Node A). If the sol-
ution forces xF beyond xk?1, then the characteristic segment spans
three or more cells. Eqs (24)–(26) need to be used again to find a
time tF0 at which the segment crosses xk?1, and after which the
search continues. Evidently, if k is the upstream boundary node,
tF 0 is the foot of the characteristic and with the concentration given
by the boundary condition.
The difficulty in computing the concentration at xF is that solute
concentration changes at the boundary will typically occur as step
changes, which are difficult to accurately capture from changes in
conditions at neighboring computational nodes. Different interpo-
lation schemes have been tested to deal with this aspect of the
method-of-characteristics solution to the advection equation. Perea
et al. (2010) used a cubic spline, but tests conducted with this
method proved unsatisfactory under some conditions. Better results
have generally been obtained with Akima interpolation (Akima
1970).
Akima interpolation is a cubic spline scheme where the inter-
polating function for the interval ½xk; xkþ1 is given by
The coefficients of Eq. (27) are computed subject to
where ? = known value of fðxÞ (in this case, the concentration
values); and s? = weighted average slope of the curve defined by
the discrete points ?k, computed as follows:
where s = slopes of individual segments, given by
An important difference between the conventional cubic and the
Akima spline is that the former assumes continuous second deriv-
atives whereas the second does not. Thus, the Akima interpolation
reduces artificial oscillations induced by rapid changes in the esti-
mated second derivative.
This value is either the interpolated value at time i or the upstream
boundary condition.
In blocked-end irrigation systems, velocities can be zero or near-
zero after cutoff, meaning that the characteristic curves are near
vertical. Under these conditions, advection calculations stop and
the concentration at Node A is simply assumed to be equal to that
of Node B.
Dispersion Equation
The Crank-Nicolson method has proven an effective method for
solving the dispersion problem in previous studies (Zerihun et al.
2005a; Perea et al. 2010). It is a centered-difference, second-order-
accurate scheme applicable to parabolic differential equations
(LeVeque 2002). Application of the scheme to a grid point k yields
where ? = dimensionless time weighting factor, set to 0.5; and C =
advection solution. Discretization of the spatial derivative and
grouping of common terms produces
The Appendix explains the terms ?, ?, ?, and ?, and additional
details have been given by Perea et al. (2010) and Zerihun et al.
(2005a).
Application of Eq. (32) to all interior nodes produces a tridiag-
onal system of linear equations. Press et al. (2007) described an
efficient solution algorithm for tridiagonal systems of equations,
which, furthermore, allow one to store the coefficients ?k, ?k, ?k,
and ?k in separate vectors. A goal in the implementation of the
boundary conditions is the preservation of the tridiagonal structure.
In contrast with the advection solution, upstream and downstream
boundary conditions are needed to solve the dispersion equation.
For Node 0, the upstream boundary condition prior to cutoff is
the prescribed concentration Eq. (13). For Node 1, and because the
concentration at Node 0 is given, Eq. (32) is written
During advance, no solute can flow beyond the leading edge
of the stream. The downstream boundary condition is then a zero-
concentration gradient
Perea et al. (2010) used a centered finite difference to approxi-
mate Eq. (34), which requires adding a ghost node to the calcula-
tions.A simpler approach wasadopted herein by usingsecond-order
backward differences. The approximation (LeVeque 2007) was de-
veloped considering the possibility of cells of unequal size
Thus, when the cells are of equal size, r ¼ 2. Combining
Eqs. (35) and (34) yields
Because Eq. (39) cannot be used during the first two time steps,
a low-order finite-difference approximation is used instead, from
which
Hence, for the first time step, Ci1þ1 ¼ Ci0þ1, and for the second
After the stream reaches the end of the field, Eq. (34) continues
to apply if the downstream boundary is blocked but not with a free-
draining irrigation system because the solute can flow beyond
the end of the field. In that case, the concentration gradient of the
diffusion solution is assumed equal to the advection flow gradient
(Zerihun et al. 2005a; Perea et al. 2010)
Using Eq. (35) to represent Eq. (42) yields
in which f1 and f2 are as in Eq. (38). After combining withEq. (33), the equation for node N ? 1 with a free-draining
boundary is
After water is shut off, the upstream boundary condition is a
solute zero-gradient, like the downstream condition. Using a
second-order forward finite-difference approximation yields an
expression for the concentration at the boundary
This notation assumes that the index of the upstream node is
always zero and, thus, that node indices are adjusted as the stream
contracts. In contrast with Eq. (37), r is now the ratio of the length
of the first two cells to the first. Eq. (46) in combination with
Eq. (32) yields the equation for Node 1
Determination of Longitudinal Dispersion
Elder (1959) conducted the first modeling study on dispersion in
open channels. That author related Kx to the shear stress acting on
the channel boundary under the assumption of a logarithmic veloc-
ity profile with depth, but not accounting for velocity variations
across the stream
where y = flow depth; u = shear velocity (L/T); Ce = dimension-
less coefficient equal to 5.86; R = hydraulic radius (L); and Sf =
friction slope. Flume measurements were used to determine Ce.
Zerihun et al. (2005b) and García-Navarro et al. (2000) adopted
the Elder equation to model solute transport with borders. Zerihun
et al. (2005b) produced reasonable predictions relative to their ex-
perimental data with constant set to 4, but García-Navarro et al.
(2000) concluded that Eq. (48) underpredicted Kx by a factor of
10 under the conditions of their study.
Interest in methods for characterizing Kx is mostly related to the
study of dispersion in natural streams (Wallis and Manson 2004),
where channel geometry,and therefore velocity gradients and trans-
verse mixing, are complex in comparison with the laboratory
conditions of the Elder study. Not surprisingly, studies have shown
that Eq. (48) severely underpredicts Kx when applied to river
flows, where the measured values can vary by orders of magnitude
(Fischer et al. 1979).
Burguete et al. (2009) estimated Kx with the following equation
developed from river flow data, which they attributed to Rutherford
(1994):
Eq. (50) yields larger Kx values for the same flow conditions
than Eq. (48) because it is a function of wetted perimeter WP in-
stead of flow depth. The measurements of Burguete et al. (2009)
were reasonably well predicted with their solute transport model in
combination with Eq. (50), but they tested their model only using a
narrow border.
In their fertigation model, Perea et al. (2010) calculated Kx with
the Fischer equation (Fischer et al. 1979). This equation was ini-
tially developed considering the structure of the transverse velocity
and mixing coefficient across a stream’s cross section. The initial
expression was then simplified using empirical relationships devel-
oped from dispersion measurements in rivers (Fischer et al. 1979;
Wallis and Manson 2004), which yielded
where W = flow top width; and other variables are as previously
defined. Although Perea et al. (2011) produced accurate predictions
in comparison with their solute dispersal measurements with, their
tests were confined to furrows. Clearly, the Fischer equation will
predict much larger Kx values than Eqs. (48) and (50) for similar
flow conditions because of the contribution of the W2 term. Hence,
it seems unlikely that Eq. (51) can be used with border irrigation
because the top width is very large in comparison with flow depth
in those systems.
Some authors have recognized the limitations of the Fischer
equation, even when applied to rivers, and thus have proposed en-
hancements to that approach. One such improvement was proposed
by Deng et al. (2001) based on relationships they developed for the
cross-sectional area of rivers and resistance, and measurements of
transverse mixing. The equation is
All variables have been previously defined. An important differ-
ence with respect to Eq. (51) is the power of the top width term.
This has a significant impact at the scale of surface irrigation flows.
Comparisons of Kx values predicted with Eqs. (48)–(52) will be
presented subsequently.
Implementation in Code
The proposed solute transport model was added to WinSRFR as a
class (SoluteTransport) of the SRFR dynamic-link library (DLL).
SoluteTransport is a subclass of a parent class that was developed
to handle different types of constituent transport calculations, to
be implemented in the future. In the SRFR DLL, the Irrigation
class handles the hydraulic simulation (Bautista et al. 2016). A
SoluteTransport object cannot be instantiated independently of an
Irrigation object, but the reverse is true. Thus, for a given data
set, users can select to run the hydraulic simulation alone or in
combination with the ADE model. In the latter case, the methods
of SoluteTransport run subsequently to those of Irrigation using
the output data objects created by Irrigation. This gives SoluteTran-
sport access to the computational grid and to flow variables for each
computational node.
Data sets collected by García-Navarro et al. (2000), Playán and Faci
(1997), and Perea et al. (2011) were used in this analysis. They are
identified in Table 1 and in the remainder of this article simply as
the Garcia, Playan, and Perea data sets. The Garcia data set was
collected on a border that was covered with plastic overlaid with
gravel to prevent infiltration. Four tests were reported, and the one
used here is the Unsteady test 1. Because water depths were not
measured, the Manning n was calibrated from the measured final
advance time (because infiltration was zero), and the dispersivity
Kx was calibrated from a separate test conducted under steady-state
conditions. It is interesting that García-Navarro et al. (2000) re-
ported a Manning roughness coefficient of 0.04 for a steady test
and 0.09 for the unsteady one, even though the tests were con-
ducted on the same border. Those authors discussed possible rea-
sons for the difference.
The Playan data set also involves a border, but with infiltration.
As with the previous test, water depths were not measured; the
Manning n was therefore determined from the measured final ad-
vance. This implies that n reflects errors in the determination of
infiltration. García-Navarro et al. (2000) modeled this scenario with
the same Kx value that they determined from their borders with no
infiltration.
Perea et al. (2011) conducted four furrow fertigation tests on
furrows. The free-draining test identified as Furrow 1 was used
here. This test, along with the two described in the previous para-
graphs, are particularly useful for evaluating the performance of
the ADE model and for quantifying the dispersivity coefficient be-
cause they consisted of a solute pulse of short duration relative to
the duration of the irrigation event. In contrast with othertests avail-
able in the literature, which apply the solute over a large portion of
the irrigation, short pulses provide ample opportunity to observe
the rising falling legs of the solute hydrographs and to quantify the
spreading of the plume.
Fig. 2 presents simulation results computed with the Garcia data set
using pure advection. This example presents special challenges be-
cause no infiltration takes place and the solute pulse is short-lived.
The graph represents the translation of the input pulse as a function
of time, with each hydrograph corresponding to the distances in-
dicated in the figure. The time scale is time from the start of the
irrigation, and the vertical scale represents the relative concentra-
tion, i.e., the ratio of concentration at the indicated station and the
inlet concentration. Although no water infiltrates, flow is unsteady
and velocities are changing along the furrow, which should lead to
some spreading of the pulse, especially after cutoff (which occurs
prior to the final advance time). Evidence of numerical dispersion is
provided by the broadening of the base of the pulse at different
distances with little attenuation of the peak.
The two sets of results presented in the graph correspond to
computations with the Akima and cubic spline (CuSpl) schemes.
Whereas the Akima scheme eliminated small oscillations produced
by the cubic spline solution, ultimately both methods produced
extreme solute relative mass-balance errors, 50% and 56%, respec-
tively. Errors of this magnitude are unusual, but they can happen as
a result of the SRFR discretization strategy in combination with
particular properties of a test. Thus, it is important to understand
the source of the extreme errors of this example.
Fig. 3 helps explain the problem. The figure presents the com-
putational grid generated by the SRFR engine for the scenario and
the evolution of the advected pulse in space and time for the exam-
ple, shown in Fig. 3(a), and for a modified version of the scenario,
shown in Fig. 3(b). The adjusted scenario consists again of a 3-min
solute pulse, but the injection starts 10 min earlier. In both cases,
Fig. 2. Pure advection test with two interpolation schemes. Predicted
relative concentration as a function of distance and time for the Garcia
data set.
water flow calculations were conducted using the default cell
density (i.e., number of spatial increments) offered by the SRFR
engine, 80 cells. The images were generated with a SRFR tool,
the Network Viewer. Computational cells are very small prior to
the start of recession and difficult to discern.
After the start of recession, the time needed to dewater the next
remaining wet node determines the time step. Because the scenario
involves no infiltration, recession is unusually slow, which in turn
makes the recession time steps unusually large. Individual cells
are easier to distinguish in the diagrams with the large time steps.
The solute plume is the solid area, which in Fig. 3(a) infiltrates
completely after the first recession time step. The image shows,
therefore, that in the original scenario the solute pulse is reaching
the end of the field as the time step of the calculations increases.
That problem is not experienced with the scenario in Fig. 3(b),
where the pulse reaches the end of the field prior to recession,
and the time step remains small as the entire pulse exits the field.
Consequently, the absolute mass balance error of the modified sce-
nario is only 2%.
It should be clear that this problem can be mitigated by increas-
ing the cell density because this automatically reduces the time
step of the recession calculations. In this case, increasing the cell
density to 200 minimizes numerical dispersion and the mass-
balance error. However, the relationship between cell density and
the error is erratic, and numerical testing is needed to determine a
recommended cell density for the given conditions. In this example,
the error is minimized witha cell density of 58 and 200, but numeri-
cal dispersion effects are evident with the smaller number of cells.
For practical use, a computational strategy for addressing this or
similar types of problems that does not require user intervention
is needed. This issue is currently under investigation.
Additional pure advection tests have been conducted under
different water flow and fertigation scenarios. In general, those re-
sults show that numerical dispersion effects and the resulting mass-
balance errors are less extreme with typical irrigation scenarios in
which water infiltrates along the field and where the solute pulse
lasts for a long time relative to typical calculation time steps. The
implication is that the SRFR-generated computational grid typi-
cally will lead to accurate advection solutions. Both interpolation
schemes used here are sufficiently accurate for purposes of these
calculations. The cubic spline interpolation scheme tends to pro-
duce more noticeable oscillations in the resulting concentration
hydrographs, and mass-balance errors typically are slightly larger
than when using the Akima scheme. The latter method is easier to
implement in code but offers no discernible advantage in computa-
tional time.
Fig. 4 depicts the results of tests conducted with the full ADE
model and the Garcia data set. The dispersivity was calculated with
the Elder equation but with the Ce coefficient adjusted to produce
an average Kx equal to the calibrated value reported by García-
Navarro et al. (2000), 0.075 m2=s, based on flow conditions at cut-
off time. The single solute pulse was measured at 50, 100, and
150 m, and those are the results presented in the figure.
In comparison with the measurements, the predicted solute
pulses arrived slightly earlier and are slightly more attenuated,
especially at x ¼ 100 m. Similar results were reported by
J. Irrig. Drain. Eng.
Fig. 4. Advection-dispersion test for the Garcia data set: measured
(Meas) and predicted (Kx075) relative solute concentration as a func-
tion of time for distances x ¼ 50, 100, and 150 m.
García-Navarro et al. (2000). Thus, these predictions support those
made previously, despite some differences in computational meth-
ods. In contrast with this model, García-Navarro et al. (2000) rep-
resented the water flow with the full hydrodynamic equations.
Furthermore, they solved those equations using the McCormack
explicit scheme, which requires satisfying the Courant condition
when determining the time step of the calculations for a given spa-
tial discretization. In principle, this should lead to a grid that is bet-
ter suited for the ADE calculations. This shows that the method of
tracking segments of characteristics across multiple computational
cells, as used here, is effective.
It is important to consider as well that the results of Fig. 4 were
calculated using 80 computational cells, as in Fig. 2, but the result-
ing mass balance error was nearly 0%. This shows that actual
dispersion will mask the effects of numerical dispersion and reduce
the mass-balance error if the actual effect is sufficiently strong.
The practical implication is that although the quality of the advec-
tive solution needs to be studied as a function of cell density,
the accuracy of the solution is less affected by cell density when
dispersion is included.
García-Navarro et al. (2000) conducted limited sensitivity tests
for their example to the coefficient of dispersivity. Of interest is to
contrast estimates of Kx derived with the available predictive equa-
tions with García-Navarro et al. (2000) calibrated value Kx ¼ 0.075
and to test the sensitivity of the ADE solution to that range of
estimates. The average Kx computed with the Elder, Rutherford,
Fischer, and Deng equations, based on flow conditions at cutoff
time, were 0.006, 0.423, 0.088, and 0.162, respectively. Fig. 5
illustrates solute hydrographs predicted with the smallest and larg-
est values, i.e., a 70-fold increase in Kx. The relative concentration
peaks decreased by about a factor of 5. Clearly, order of magnitude
estimates of Kx are enough for practical calculations.
Fig. 6 presents ADE simulation results in comparison with the
measurements for the Playan tests. The single solute pulse was
measured at five distances, and the results reported here are from
the 125- and 225-m stations only. Two simulation results are in-
cluded in the graph. The series Kx75 represents results computed
with the Kx reported by García-Navarro et al. (2000), 0.075 m2=s.
As may be observed, the time of arrival of the pulse is well
predicted, but the attenuation is not. This is contrast with results
presented by García-Navarro et al. (2000), which show that both the
arrival and peak relative concentration are well predicted. The rea-
sons for the differences are unknown.
Fig. 5. Advection-dispersion test for the Garcia data set with disper-
sivity computed with the Elder and Rutherford equations.
Simulations were also conducted with dispersivity estimated
with Eqs. (48)–(52). The average Kx (computed based on average
flow conditions at the final advance time) were 0.004, 0.72, 3.334,
and 0.835 for the Elder, Rutherford, Fischer, and Deng equations,
respectively. Thus, these equations provide estimates that vary by
nearly 3 orders of magnitude. Of these estimators, the Rutherford
equation produced the best agreement with the measurements, and
predictions were not very different when Kx was estimated with the
Dengequation. The Rutherford results (Ruth)are included in Fig. 6.
These results suggest a Kx 10 times greater than for the Garcia data
set. The simulation conducted with the Fischer equation, which
produced the largest average Kx, produced large artificial oscilla-
tions in the computed solute hydrographs. Extreme values of Kx
will cause even stronger oscillations, and the ADE calculations
will fail.
Of the seven measurements stations reported in the Perea data
set, only the 152-m station is illustrated here (Fig. 7). As indicated
in Table 1, that test consists of several pulses, which allows
comparing the advection and dispersion of those different pulses.
The simulation was conducted using the Fischer equation to esti-
mate Kx as was done by Perea et al. (2011). For this test, the aver-
age Kx computed with Eqs. (48)–(52) are 0.005, 0.056, 0.008,
and 0.043 m2=s; thus, values vary by only an order of magnitude,
but are smaller than the Kx value reported for the Garcia test.
Fig. 6. Advection-dispersion test for the Playan data set: measured
(Meas) and predicted (Kx075 and Ruth) solute concentrations as a
function of time for distances x ¼ 125 and 225 m.
Fig. 7. Advection-dispersion test for the Perea data set: measured
(Meas) and predicted (Fisc and Ruth) relative solute concentrations
as a function of time at distance x ¼ 152 m.
The measurements show very little attenuation of the pulses, which
implies that that the transport process is advection controlled. Fig. 7
shows predictions generated with the Fischer (Fisc) and Rutherford
(Ruth) equations. The former reproduced the measurements with
greater accuracy, whereas the latter produced slightly attenuated
solute hydrographs.
Overall, the proposed solute transport produces results that are con-
sistent with those computed with previously published models and
with field measurements. Although the Garcia advection test re-
vealed problems with the advection solution caused by the SRFR
discretization scheme, it is important to note again that the condi-
tions of that test are difficult because it involves no infiltration and
a solute pulse of very short duration. Under typical irrigation con-
ditions, slight numerical dispersion can be expected from the ad-
vection computations, but those effects can also be expected to be
eventually overshadowed by actual dispersion, even when com-
puted with the Elder equation (Ce ¼ 5.86).
The results presented in the preceding sections offer limited
guidance about the determination of the dispersivity coefficient
under irrigation conditions. Results suggest larger Kx values for
borders (Garcia and Playan tests) than for furrows (Perea test),
and perhaps larger values with increasing border width (Garcia ver-
sus Playan tests). Excellent simulation results were obtained when
applying the Fischer equation to the Perea et al. (2011) furrow data,
but that equation seem less useful for borders because Kx varies
with the square of the top flow width. An example is the Playan
test, for which the Kx computed with the Fischer equation was
1–3 orders of magnitude greater than values computed with other
equations, even though the test border was only 3.84 m wide.
Much larger Kx estimates can be expected for typical border dimen-
sions of perhaps 50–100 m. The Rutherford equation can likewise
produce very large estimates with large top widths.
Additional fertigation data sets were sought to test Kx but the
available published data sets (Zerihun et al. 2005b; Brunetti et al.
2018) proved of limited value for that purpose. Those tests applied
the solute pulse over at least half of the irrigation duration into
blocked irrigation systems. Under those conditions, the flow veloc-
ity eventually becomes zero or near-zero, advective-dispersive
transport becomes insignificant, and molecular diffusion becomes
the primary solute transport mechanism.
Reported fertigation models have proven capable of reproduc-
ing measured solute hydrographs with reasonable accuracy under
the range of conditions tested by their authors. This model is no
exception. This relative accuracy is explained in part by the fact
that the fertigation problem is relatively simple in comparison with
similar problems such as solute transport in rivers. Irrigation flows
are always subcritical and the channel is short and prismatic or
nearly prismatic. The solute pulse is well-defined and can be ex-
pected to fully mix with the stream by the time the water enters the
field. Advection predictions are highly dependent on the calibration
of the water flow parameters (infiltration and roughness). Conse-
quently, the travel time of a nonreactive solute plume is well pre-
dicted if the water flow is well-predicted. Lastly, because the solute
injection typically occurs over a long time relative to the duration of
the irrigation event, numerical errors induced by discontinuities in
the boundary conditions (start and stop of an irrigation pulse) can
be expected to, ultimately, have a limited impact on the accuracy of
the solution.
A nonreactive solute transport model based on the advection-
dispersion equation was added to WinSRFR, a software package
for the hydraulic analysis of surface irrigation systems. Simulations
were reasonably accurate under the range of irrigation conditions
tested, but results also showed that some inaccuracies could emerge
as a result of the discretization scheme used by the hydraulic sim-
ulation model, which underlies the ADE solution. Results also re-
vealed limitations of procedures currently available for determining
the coefficient of dispersivity. Although solute transport in typical
irrigation flows can be expected to be advection-dominated, a better
understanding of the range of plausible values for the dispersivity
coefficient is needed. Studies need to be conducted under various
field conditions to establish this range.
A similar computation for the derivative at k ? 1=2 leads to
AyKx ??Cxk?1=2 ¼ Bk?1=2ðCk ? Ck?1Þ ð57Þ
where the term Bk?1=2 depends on information from the spatial
nodes k and k–1.
Applying these expressions to Eq. (31) gives
and subsequently
?k ¼ ???Bk?1=2
?k ¼ 1 þ ??Bkþ1=2 þ ??Bk?1=2
?k ¼ ???Bkþ1=2
Some or all data, models, or code that support the findings of this
study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request. The WinSRFR 5.1 software is available for public down-
load at https://www.ars.usda.gov/research/software/?modeCode
=20-20-05-15.
Abbasi,F.,F.J.Adamsen,D.J.Hunsaker,J.Feyen,P.Shouse,andM.T.
van Genuchten. 2003a. “Effects of flow depth on water flow and solute
transport in furrow irrigation: Field data analysis.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng.
129 (4): 237–246. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9437(2003)
129:4(237).
Abbasi, F., J. Šim?nek, M. T. van Genuchten, J. Feyen,F.J. Adamsen, D. J.
Hunsaker, T. S. Strelkoff, and P. Shouse. 2003b. “Overland water flow
and solute transport: Model development and field-data analysis.”
J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 129 (2): 71–81. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
0733-9437(2003)129:2(71).
Akima, H. 1970. “A new method of interpolation and smooth curve fitting
based on local procedures.” J. ACM 17 (4): 589–602. https://doi.org/10
.1145/321607.321609.
Bautista, E. 2016. “Effect of infiltration modeling approach on operational
solutions for furrow irrigation.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 142 (12):
06016012. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0001090.
Bautista, E., and J. L. Schlegel. 2019. WinSRFR 5.1 user manual.
Maricopa, AZ: Arid Land Agricultural Research Center.
Bautista, E., J. L. Schlegel, and A. J. Clemmens. 2016. “The SRFR 5
modeling system for surface irrigation.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 142 (1):
04015038. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0000938.
Boldt, A. L., D. G. Watts, D. E. Eisenhauer, and J. S. Schepers. 1994.
“Simulation of water applied nitrogen distribution under surge irriga-
tion.” Trans. ASAE 37 (4): 1157–1165. https://doi.org/10.13031/2013
.28189.
Brunetti, G., J. Šim?nek, and E. Bautista. 2018. “A hybrid finite volume-
finite element model for the numerical analysis of furrow irrigation and
fertigation.” Comput. Electron. Agric. 150 (Jul): 312–327. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.05.013.
Burguete, J., N. Zapata, I. García-Navarro, M. Maïkaka, E. Playán, and
J. Murillo. 2009. “Fertigation in furrows and level furrow systems. I:
Model description and numerical tests.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 135 (4):
401–412. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0000097.
Cunge, J. A., F. Holly Jr., and A. Verwey. 1980. Practical aspects of
computational river hydraulics. London: Pitman.
Dai, W., S. Zhang, D. Xu, M. Bai, and Y. Li. 2019. “Numerical comparison
between iterative and noniterative coupled simulations for surfacewater
flow and solute transport with unstructured grid in two-dimensional ba-
sin fertigation.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 145 (1): 04018036. https://doi.org
/10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0001361.
Deng, Z. Q., V. P. Singh, and L. Bengtsson. 2001. “Longitudinal dispersion
coefficient in straight rivers.” J. Hydraul. Eng. 127 (11): 919–927.
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9429(2001)127:11(919).
Ebrahimian, H., A. Liaghat, M. Parsinejad, E. Playán, F. Abbasi, and
M.Navabian.2013.“Simulation of 1D surface and 2D subsurfacewater
flow and nitrate transport in alternate and conventional furrow fertiga-
tion.” Irrig. Sci. 31 (3): 301–316. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00271-011
-0303-3.
Elder, J. W. 1959. “The dispersion of marked fluid in turbulent shear
flow.” J. Fluid Mech. 5 (4): 544–560. https://doi.org/10.1017
/S0022112059000374.
Mixing in inland and coastal waters. New York: Academic Press.
García-Navarro, P., E. Playán, and N. Zapata. 2000. “Solute transport
modeling in overland flow applied to fertigation.” J. Irrig. Drain.
Eng. 126 (1): 33–40. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9437(2000)
126:1(33).
Islam, R. M., and H. M. Chaudhry. 1997. “Numerical solution of transport
equation for applications in environmental hydraulics and hydrology.”
J. Hydrol. 191 (1): 106–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1694(96)
03077-6.
LeVeque, R. J. 2007. Finite difference methods for ordinary and partial
differential equations. Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics.
Murillo, J., J. Burguete, P. Brufau, and P. García-Navarro. 2005. “Coupling
between shallow water and solute flow equations: Analysis and man-
agement of source terms in 2D.” Int. J. Numer. Methods Fluids 49 (3):
267–299. https://doi.org/10.1002/fld.992.
Perea, H., E. Bautista, D. J. Hunsaker, T. S. Strelkoff, C. Williams, and
F. J.Adamsen. 2011. “Nonuniform and unsteady solute transport in fur-
row irrigation. II: Description of field experiments and calibration of
infiltration and roughness coefficients.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 137 (5):
315–326. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0000295.
Perea, H., T. S. Strelkoff, F. J. Adamsen, D. J. Hunsaker, and A. J.
Clemmens. 2010. “Nonuniform and unsteady solute transport in furrow
irrigation. I: Model development.” J. Irrig. Drain. Eng. 136 (6): 365–
375. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)IR.1943-4774.0000106.
Playán, E., and J.M. Faci. 1997. “Border fertigation: Field experiments and
a simple model.” Irrig. Sci. 17 (4): 163–171. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s002710050035.
