Title:
Between Negative Stigma (Cultural Deprivation)
and Positive Stigma (Learning Disability): The
Historical Development of Two Special Education
Tracks

Abstract:
This article posits an updated, broader perspective on the concept of learning disabilities (LDs) than that accepted in the local Israeli literature, revealing how it is immersed in class, ethnicity, and culture. This is shown through historical description, accreditation, and contrasting of the two special education discourses: the ‘‘cultural deprivation’’ discourse and the ‘‘LDs’’ discourse. There are three sections. Part One presents the theoretical, conceptual, and methodological back- ground of the sociological and discursive debate about LDs. The social- constructivist model used in an analysis of the two categories is proposed as an alternative to the clinical–medical model. The de?nitions of LDs and cultural deprivation accepted in the Israeli discourse are presented in Part Two. The metamorphoses in the discourse about the category of LDs are uncovered through reference to their conceptual and historical antecedents. This part discusses the various understandings and constructions of learning dif?culties. Part Three examines the textual representation of parents of children with disabilities in both cases, exploring the meanings of guilt, responsibility, and agency in each discourse. The conclusion clari?es the social and political signi?cance of the distinct textual and rhetorical representations. It becomes evident that the discourse on LDs and the discourse on cultural deprivation are two special education tracks directed at dif- ferent target audiences: the culturally enriched audience, well-off and educated on the one hand, and the Mizrahi audience of limited means and education on the other hand. 
----------------------


Text:
----------------------

Part One
Introduction
Duringthesixth decade ofthe twentiethcentury, twoclinical andeducationalcategories
regarding learning and social dif?culties were formed in Israel. One category—that of
cultural deprivation—has disappeared from the contemporary Israeli public and
academic discourse. In contrast, the second category—that of learning disabilities
(LDs)—has gathered ever greater and greater momentum and public exposure. The
prestige of the ?rst category has been waning due to the long series of social and
professional criticisms that it was subjected to for many years. The prestige of the
second category has been rising though and it is now enjoying an almost unanimous
acceptance among academic researchers as well as educators and practitioners.
Both of those two historical categories purportedly delineated speci?c medical-
ized conditions that were very different from regular learning dif?culties: cultural
deprivation expressed learning dif?culties and failure emanating from socio-
economic and cultural sources, while LDs expressed learning dif?culties and failure
emanating from biological sources. Interestingly, to date, no academic efforts have
been made in Israeli professional and educational literature to juxtapose those two
clinical categories and scrutinize them reciprocally.
This juxtaposition seems necessary on the backdrop of the historical parallel
evolution of the two special education discourses that made the existence of the two
clinical categories possible. Over the years, the two discourses developed in parallel
asymptotically establishing distinct territories of work and knowledge. Different
disciplines, professionals, and practices developed in order to aid and treat the
varying needs of the two types of population that were constituted as subjects of
these two special education discourses. Points of contact between the two discourses
were almost entirely absent. It is worth mentioning that even the critical sociological
and educational literature about cultural deprivation ignored its historical and
educational twin and the social implications of that simultaneous evolution.
The current article seeks to throw light on the aforementioned silence by
juxtaposing the two special education discourses while emphasizing their central
points of similarity and of divergence. The article delineates the two clinical twin
representations that were constructed in both of the discourses while accentuating
their dissimilarities. Among those, one can ?nd divergent representations of the
‘‘self’’ (both of the disabled and of their parents) that were constructed in the
framework of the two discourses, different expectations of the two populations and
their families, different causal attributions of the two syndromes and different
educational ideologies in which the two discourses were embedded. The current
article also aims to clarify the importance of the two discourses’ parallel analysis by
interpreting its ?ndings in the framework of Israeli society’s hierarchical ethnic and
class characters (a social aspect that has been dominant since the country
establishment1).
The claim is made that an analytical juxtaposition of the two special education
discourseshelps torevealthe different assumptions which the educational expertsheld
with regard to the two populations. It is claimed that, from their very beginning in the
1960s, the two discourses were directed at distinct social populations. Whereas the
objects of the cultural deprivation discourse were the Mizrahim, lower class and less
educated, the objects of the LD discourse were Ashkenazim, the established and
educated.2
There are three sections. Part One presents the theoretical and the conceptual
background of the discussion. It presents claims based theoretically on the
intellectual ?elds of critical discourse analysis, narratology and sociology of
knowledge. It also clari?es its methodological guidelines while delineating the
textual corpus that serves as its data.
Part Two presents the de?nitions of LDs and of cultural deprivation accepted in
the Israeli discourse as well as their historical transformations. The metamorphoses
in the discourse in relation to the category of LDs are uncovered through reference
to their conceptual and historical antecedents. This part reveals the two aforemen-
tioned discourses’ divergent conceptions and constructions of learning dif?culties:
Negative stigmatization in the cultural deprivation case vis-a?-vis Positive stigma-
tization in the case of LDs.
Part Three further exposes the differencesbetween the two discourses by examining
the textual representation of parents of children with disabilities and families in both
cases, as well as the different expert expectations in the two cases. The distinct
discursive positioning of the families in both cases (parental inclusionand participation
in the LDs case vis-a?-vis parental exclusion in the cultural deprivation case) uncovers
important distinctions in the families’ textual representations while exploring the
meanings of guilt, responsibility, and agency in each discourse. The learning disabled
parent’s constructed pro?le is that of a good parent in potentiality: an imagined ideal
parent helping his child to overcome the disability. The culturally deprived parent’s
constructed pro?le is that of a pathological case comprising a central component of the
child’s problem. The expert literature consistently blurs the learning disabled parent’s
ethnic and class characteristics while it contrarily highlights the culturally deprived
parent’s ethnic and class characteristics. Finally, the article explicates the social and
political implications of those distinct textual and rhetorical representations by
highlighting their embeddedness in the Israeli ethnic and class social structure. The
textual representations constructed a purportedly strong link between good parenthood
and a well-off socio-economic class holding a distinct, signi?cant cultural capital. In
contrast, the texts constructed a strong link between problematic parenthood of limited
means lacking in both economic and cultural capital. Thus, the LDs discourse (much
like the cultural deprivation discourse) could have been used potentially from its very
inception as a divergent special education track serving a distinct social population.
The discourse on class and ethnic embeddedness has not been dealt with in the Israeli
academic literature. Revealing the conceptual, historical, and cultural foundations of
the current Israeli, LD discourse can eventually contribute to the development of a
more theoretically complex discourse by exposing its cultural and political context as
well as the social forces shaping it in the present and possibly in the future.
Methodology and Corpus Selection
The professional discourse is analyzed by means of discourse analysis and narrative
analysis techniques. Using these, the article focuses on the different ways that
enable the LD experts to enforce their version of social reality with the aid of
various linguistic manipulations. In this article, discourse refers to routine mundane
practices that produce, stabilize, and enforce social relations characterized by social
control and hierarchical distinction between social groups (Thompson 1984).
Narrative refers to routine interpretative devices through which people represent
‘‘reality,’’ ‘‘self,’’ and ‘‘disease’’ conceptions to themselves and to others (Riessman
2008). Furthermore, these processes are also constructed in written texts through the
use of linguistic strategies of symbolic construction (Thompson 1984).
The daily social use of language produces and reproduces various meanings through
its narrative components (Colyar and Holley 2010; Horsdal 2012; Riessman 2008;
Toolan2001). Claims that aremaderegarding thesocialrealityare oftenperceived asself
evident. This is an expressionofthe power of language toproducesuch self evidentiality
(Fairclough 1992). For example, this is the position of the clinical explanations
embedded in professional written texts serving as data in the current article.3
The current research is based on a rich textual corpus which includes two types of
professional and academic literature: Israeli literature about cultural deprivation
(Teinut Tipuach in Hebrew) and Israeli literature about LDs (Lekuyot Lemida in
Hebrew). In both cases, the material selected for analysis included texts which were
regarded as central (canonical) in their ?elds as well as other texts.4 The earliest of
the analyzed texts were published during the sixth decade of the twentieth century
(concomitant with the inception of the LD ?eld in Israel). The selection of the LD
literature and the delineation of the corpus for the purposes of the current research
were made in two ways. First, with regard to LDs, a thorough archival scan was
made in the various Israeli academic education libraries. Thereafter, all the texts
which included LDs (as well as brain damage) as their subject were selected.5
Second, interviews were conducted with various didactic-diagnosticians who were
asked to state what, in their view, were the most important Israeli (canonical) texts
in their ?eld of expertise as well as what written texts had in?uenced them the most
professionally. Following a triangulation of the interviewees’ answers, additional
speci?c texts were selected and further archival work was conducted in order to
locate those texts whose authors were mentioned in the interviews as being central
?gures in the Israeli LD ?eld.6 Regarding the cultural deprivation literature too, a
thorough archival scan was conducted in the Israeli academic education libraries.
Second, various education researchers were asked to state what, in their view, were
the most important Israeli (canonical) texts in the cultural deprivation ?eld. Various
central texts were then selected. A special effort was made to locate those texts
which were identi?ed in the Israeli critical-pedagogical and sociological literature
as written by central ?gures in the cultural deprivation ?eld.7 The work was based
on both primary expert literature and on secondary sources.
On the Social Construction of LDs and Cultural Deprivation
Various researchers, basing themselves on the social construction paradigm, claim
that clinical knowledge (medical, psychological, and special-pedagogical) that is
usually regarded as objective and neutral is, in fact, socially constructed (Bury
1986). In terms of this social model, the objects of study of the various clinical
professions are not decontextualized neutral and objective objects. Rather they are
objectivizations (Berger and Luckman 1967). That is to say that clinical entities are
more similar to socially originated inventions than they are to decontextualized
discoveries. Clinical entities are constructed within the framework of a medicalizing
and psychopathologizing model by manipulating scienti?c ideologies, terminolo-
gies, and technologies. Nowadays, this model is producing an alarmingly increasing
number of clinical categories characterized by distinct mental and physical qualities
(Carter et al. 2012; Conrad 1992, 2006, 2007; Riska 2003).8 On the current state of
the medicalization theory and on the different conceptualizations of medicalization
within it, see Clarke et al. (2009, 2010). On the various meanings of the concept of
medicalization and on its evolution, see Nye (2003). In developed countries, this
psychopathologizing model has turned out to be the main model through which
people think, experience, and understand their problems, their lives and their world.
Within this framework, complex social phenomena are reduced to clinical
symptoms which purportedly testify to their originating disorders or diseases.
The psychological and medical model spreads with the help of various social
carriers which daily testify to its ?ndings in routine practices and articulations;
expert professionals who serve as an army in the processes of locating, diagnosing,
and caring; clinically labeled subjects; different organizations (bureaucratic
institutions in which the processes of clinical construction are taking place, or
NGOs with social agendas speaking on behalf of those labeled); and other social
sites in which cultural representations and imageries of diseases, disorders, and
problems are reproduced again and again thus legitimizing practices of medical
supervision and control (Clarke et al. 2010; Moghimi 2012; Pulkingham and Fuller
2012).
The medical and psychological frameworks are being implemented in a growing
number of spheres of human experience thereby constructing new clinical
categories and professional communities which are made responsible for their
management and interpretation (Clarke et al. 2010). This process is happening
nowadays in the educational sphere in which one can discern a current process of
medicalization of educational phenomena, a process in which clinical professionals
adopt medical explanatory and therapeutic models applying them to social and
educational matters (see, for example, Petrina 2006). The current article seeks to
explicate the twin phenomena of LDs and cultural deprivation in light of the
aforementioned medicalization process, by treating them both as particular cases of
social construction.
Part Two
The de?nition of Brain Damage and LDs—delineating the problem and concep-
tualizing it in biological terms
In the research and professional literature, learning dif?culties and problems have
been conceptualized as part of the various medical, psychological, and education
paradigms. The conceptualization of LDs, with all the terminology and theoretical
models that explain them, only began to appear in the literature in Israel in the late
1960s. Prior to this, various other concepts were used by experts attempting to
characterize and explain the quality of the learning dif?culties and problems they
came into contact with.
For example, in the initial decades of the twentieth century, there were widely
used terms in the ?eld of medical pedagogy in Israel such as: a-normal, organic,
non-normal, educational dif?culties, marginal, neurotic, problematic, lagging, to
refer to children who displayed dif?culties in learning various skills and abilities
(Hamdani 2003; Simpson 1985; Razi 2006). In the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, the
?eld which had begun to be termed special education, identi?ed children with
dif?culties as ‘‘having disabilities in brain function,’’ as ‘‘having brain function
disturbances’’, strephosymbolic, legastenic, hyperkinetic or exogenous. At times,
they were described as having cerebral dysfunction, neuropsychiatric syndrome,
brain defects, diffuse minimal brain defects, brain damage, disturbances in the
central nervous system, hyperactivity syndrome, and so on (Eilon 1970; Birch 1970,
Belgor 1977; Hess 1966; Arazi 1972). Another concept that was very popular during
those years was cultural deprivation, a designation given mostly to children who
belonged to families of Middle-Eastern origin of limited means.9 Contrary to the
other concepts which were conceived as emanating from a biological–etiological
infrastructure, the concept of cultural deprivation was believed to originate from an
environmental etiological infrastructure (even though it still also had biological
manifestations as a consequence of the environment characterictics).10,11,12
A review of the books and articles in Hebrew on the subject revealed that, since
the adoption of the term LD, the term LDs has become popular and has replaced the
various aforementioned concepts (concepts which came to be regarded anachro-
nistically as its predecessors). The historical terms were presented as erroneous, as
theoretically, morally and ideologically charged, as damaging to the children, and as
the subjects of many disputes. In contrast, the term LD and the range of terms of
which it was composed, was identi?ed as accurate, neutral, and objective, as not
harmful and as one which enjoyed broad acceptance.13
Interestingly, the founding father of the Israeli LD ?eld (as well as of the term
LDs itself) was identi?ed as the US professor, Samuel Kirk. Kirk de?ned LDs thus:
A learning disability refers to a retardation, disorder or delayed development
in one or more of the processes of speech, language, reading, writing,
arithmetic or other school subject resulting from a psychological handicap
caused by a possible cerebral dysfunction and/or emotional or behavioral
disturbances. It is not the result of mental retardation, sensory deprivation, or
cultural and instructional factors.
Indeed, in Kirk’s LD de?nition, emotional or behavioral disturbances are also
mentioned as possible causes of LDs, but early in the ?eld’s inception, those
potential causes were marginalized and were replaced by the cause which came to
be known as neurological (cerebral dysfunction in Kirk’s terms). Moreover, in later
de?nitions of LD, emotional or behavioral causes were already de?ned as non-
causal factors. Otherwise they were simply erased. No later than the late 1960s,
Kirk’s de?nition was replaced with new de?nitions. Those newer de?nitions are
important for the purposes of the current article mainly in their explicit rejection of
environmental, cultural, or economic factors as possible and relevant causes in the
development of LDs. The neurological factor has thus become the only relevant
etiological cause.14
The LD discourse was characterized from its very beginning by an empathizing
and sympathizing portrayal of the human subjects who were constructed by it.
Comprehensive descriptions were devoted to the psychological frustration, the
dif?culties, and even to the allegedly suffering of those labeled by it as they were
portrayed as being in a constant struggle against their constitutional weaknesses as
well as against the intolerant society. The learning disabled were also described as
having intact motivation and intelligence. As a matter of fact, they were often
described in the literature as being endowed with higher than average intelligence,
capabilities, and potential. Especially interesting was the customary claim made by
experts whereby failure in intelligence tests did not necessarily indicate the lack of
intellectual capabilities or of cognitive potential on the part of the learning disabled
child. Problematic manifestations of personality traits, familial relationships, or
emotional dif?culties, in cases in which they were found, were identi?ed as
consequences of the organic de?ciency (and not as its generators). For example, in
the framework of the LD discourse, LDs were a causal factor of problematic family
relationships. The opposite process, in which problematic family relationships could
have possibly been a causal factor of LDs, was rejected.
These characteristics of the LD discourse had a positive stigmatic in?uence.
Therefore, it is not surprising that this discourse had a strong seductive potential
from its inception. The problematic children who were constructed within the
framework of the LD discourse did not resemble the previous multitude of brain
damaged, brain handicapped, and brain defectives (the concepts that populated the
expert literature prior to the introduction of the LD discourse). Likewise, the LDs
children did not resemble the parallel discourse of the cultural deprivation children
who were characterized as suffering from low intelligence, low motivation, lack of
emotional maturity, and criminal-like lines of behavior.
Contrary to the negative stigmatization of the culturally deprived children, not
only was the LD children’s self not contaminated, but also, more often than not,
these children’s self came to be marked by augmentative quali?ers.15 In this
manner, those marked as LD have came to be perceived more and more as
intelligent and as motivational. As a consequence, previous medical and
pedagogical discourses (including the parallel cultural deprivation discourse) were
turned upside down: Academic dif?culties that were previously identi?ed with
mental retardation, with intellectual mediocrity, with laziness, or with moral
weakness, have begun to be perceived as indicative of exactly the opposite traits!
The new LDs’ discourse had many advantages. The self of the children who had
academic dif?culties was no longer contaminated, since that dif?culty was
delimited to the educational domain alone within its framework. The new discourse
enabled the prevention of the neurological susceptibility to cross-over into other
dimensions of the self-concept (such as personality, cognition, psyche, etc.). Thus,
the children under discussion could become marked as having a coherent,
integrative, and healthy self. Their cognitive, mental, and psychological identity
remained without a blot on it, their identi?cation as disabled (biologically
originated) notwithstanding. Moreover, the neurological susceptibility discussed
was conceptualized in an a-deterministic way, a conceptualization that facilitated
the reception of the new discourse among groups of worried parents. That is, even
though the susceptibility was identi?ed as permanent by the expert diagnosticians,
they still considered it reparable and reversible for their part. To a large extent, the
LDs label had a unique role—it was a kind of positive clinical stigma16,17 that was
in stark contrast to alternative clinical pathologizing categories that largely had (and
some of them still have) a role of negative stigmatic labels.
In the past, the term, cultural deprivation (as well as its equivalents, reading
deprived and fostering required) was used to de?ne students who failed in their
studies for reasons that were identi?ed as socio-economic and cultural. These
students were perceived as requiring educational fostering; the term cultural
deprivation was coined in the United States after the Second World War and gave
expression to a perception that emphasized society’s responsibility to advance
neglected groups and to integrate them into the education system, society, and
culture (Arieli et al. 1997). The reasons for cultural deprivation were attributed to
education methods in the family, which were not appropriate for the Western middle
class, its mindset, its language, and the school culture in these societies. A
translation of these perceptions into the Israeli context was given major expression
in the works of researchers and educators such as Frankenstein (1970), who claimed
that the thinking potential of these children was harmed because they were not
exposed to suf?cient stimuli at critical stages of their cognitive development.
In the early 1960s, the Israeli education system started to grapple with the
problem of the culturally deprived by providing additional funding, like teaching
hours, small classes, teaching aids and special programs, and teaching methods for
schools that were de?ned as culturally deprived. It is interesting to note that,
concurrently, similar steps were taken with regard to children identi?ed as having
brain damage or were ‘‘organic’’ (later termed learning disabled).
Indeed, in the 1990s, the use of the term culturally deprived in Israel was
abandoned completely (Arieli et al. 1997). ‘‘It was found that it labels population
groups on the basis of their ethnic origin, reinforces stigmas, and reduces their
chances of extricating themselves from the situation.’’ The use of this term is no
longer fashionable; however, it is apparent that the use of its historic twin—LDs—
has become more and more widespread. The term LDs has established itself
conceptually and practically in educational institutions and places which were
previously occupied by other logical discourses.18
The cultural deprivation discourse was characterized by dis-empathizing and
stigmatic portrayal of the human subjects who were constructed by it. The
problematic children who were constructed within its framework were conceived as
intellectually, emotionally, and morally damaged. Contrary to the case of the
learning disabled children, the self-identity of the culturally deprived was
cognitively, mentally, and psychically contaminated. Moreover, as opposed to the
learning disabled children’s a-deterministic portrayal, the physical susceptibility of
culturally deprived children was portrayed mostly in deterministic terms. The origin
of the susceptibility was indeed conceived as environmental in nature, but still its
physical manifestations were regarded as completely irreparable. To a large extent,
the cultural deprivation label was used as a negative stigmatization (similar to many
other clinical categories mentioned in the medicalization literature).
These two distinct channels of educational discourse and policy (that of cultural
deprivation and that of LDs) developed concurrently in Israel. Therefore, it is
surprising that the two special education discourses developed almost without any
explicit mutual references. This is especially surprising when one takes into account
that both focused on young and so-called problematic populations of the education
system at the time. Even more notable is this mutual disregard given their common
interest in identifying academic–educational problems, in locating their origins, and
in developing pedagogical, didactic, diagnostic, and therapeutic intervention
methods for the purpose of coping with them.
The parallel progress of the two discourses was also expressed in the creation
of an apparent division of labor between experts in education and psychology who
focused their attention on the culturally deprived and those who concentrated on
the population of the brain damaged (at a later stage called the learning disabled).
Both sets drew upon psychological and educational models and theories; both
formulated the educational problematics, often using the very same terms; both
developed various means of identifying and intervening for the very same
educational needs; and both wrote and published their studies in the same
journals. So, this makes it more remarkable that there were almost no explicit
references and mutual interchanges between the two discourses. And this does not
include any consideration about the essence, the need for, and the sources of
distinction between the two types of population—a conceptual and institutional
distinction that was dominant and doxic as long as the term culturally deprived
was in use.
Juxtaposing the Two Syndromes
Despite the differences in emphasis in the various de?nitions of cultural deprivation,
several components have become accepted by the scholarly community and
educators as basic to the de?nition of this educational problem. Darin (1984), for
example, noted that ‘‘there are various de?nitions of the syndrome of cultural
deprivation, but all of them have at least three ?xed characteristics: low scholastic
achievements, low learning ability, and lack of motivation for learning.’’ To these,
he added that ‘‘in the accepted of?cial de?nition in the United States, these
components were supplemented by low intelligence quotient, and belonging to a
low socio-economic stratum.’’19 As early as 1966, Robinson determined that
‘‘reading deprivation’’ (a term that served in combination with cultural deprivation)
has its source in a failed cultural environment together with low intelligence. He
also declared that an objective measure of this was the parameter of father’s
occupation (Darin 1984).
Sachs (1971) identi?ed cultural deprivation with ‘‘environmentally instigated
retardation’’ which he termed ‘‘pseudo-retardation’’ and linked the retardation to
‘‘cultural inadequacy, poverty, and primitiveness.’’ Daniel (1971) expanded on this
and explained that ‘‘all the [culturally deprived] children, other than a few
exceptions, belong to a low cultural stratum; their parents came from weakened
Levantine countries, and, even there, belonged to a weakened socio-cultural
stratum.’’ He, too, comes to the conclusion that the I.Q. of the culturally deprived is
low ‘‘because of a cumulative de?cit.’’
And so it came about that the subjects of the conceptualization of cultural
deprivation were identi?ed and established in the framework of this discourse as
unquali?ed cognitively–intellectually and motivationally–morally at one and the
same time. A distorted mirror image of the organically damaged (the predecessor of
the disability discourse) was attributed categorically to culturally deprived
children.20 It must be remembered that in the formative period of this discourse
on LDs, the dominant opinion in this ?eld determined that the children with organic
issues have standard intelligence and standard motivation.
Etiological Differences
In contrast to the endogenous delineation of LDs, from the outset, the phenomenon
of cultural deprivation was delineated as exogenous. For example, Stahl (1977)
stated that ‘‘The term ‘culturally deprived students’ refers to those children with
dif?culty in their school studies for environmental reasons.’’ Various environmental
models were developed which identi?ed the causes of cultural deprivation with
cultural, socio-economic, or family factors.21 The various models were trying to
create a link between the problematic environmental conditions in which the
children were raised and the personality and behavioral qualities which developed in
them as a result of these conditions. These conditions were considered to be an
expression of backwardness both in preserving this backwardness and as its
outcome, and as ones that justi?ed the need for educational projects for intervention
and fostering.
The various written works present an index of characteristics attributed to the
culturally deprived characteristics that were perceived as deriving directly from the
backward lifestyle in which they were formed. Thus, it is possible to outline the
pro?le of the culturally deprived self—that self that was shaped by the expert
discourse on it. A central characteristic attributed to the culturally deprived was
their lack of motivation to learn and to progress.22
The experts made extensive use of concepts like lack of motivation, absence of
mobility, weak desire for achievement, dependence on external authority, and lack
of internal driving force to characterize the main aspects of cultural deprivation and
also to provide an explanation for the long-term survival of the weaknesses of these
students in the various educational frameworks. The weakness of the Mizrahi
culture and the weakness of character of the culturally deprived student were
melded together in the professional literature:
‘‘Many anthropological studies have shown that cultural style plays a decisive
part in the creation of the motivational structure of personality in earliest
childhood’’ declared Emerant (1968), accentuating that ‘‘learning disruptions in
the ?eld of motivation are common on the backdrop of the crisis of moving from
one culture to another.’’ ‘‘Our assumption is that this student will display little
motivation to study, because those causes of motivation that are linked to studying
are activated in his personality only in a mediocre or weak manner,’’ emphasized
Adar (1968) in discussing the low desire for achievement of culturally deprived
children: ‘‘The culturally deprived student displays lack of interest in his studies, in
books, and in other intellectual pursuits. Even when the teacher manages to arouse
his attention to what is happening in the classroom, he remains passive and lacking
in enthusiasm. Due to weak motivation and de?cient work habits, he is not able to
comply with the tasks assigned to him and he does his homework in a non-standard
manner,’’ stated Minkowitz in the preface to his book, ‘‘The Culturally Deprived
Child’’ (1969).
Another important characteristic attributed to the culturally deprived is the so-
called thinking de?ciencies from which they were considered to be suffering,
de?ciencies which added explanatory reinforcement for the low achievements of the
culturally deprived in the various educational frameworks. Terms such as damaged
intelligence, de?cient thinking, mentally immature, oriented toward the concrete,
and low intellectual capacity were widespread in the expert descriptions of
culturally deprived students.23 These negative portrayals of the mental capacity of
culturally deprived students were in common use by the expert community. These
were the positions of Carl Frankenstein, educator and theoretician, one of the
founders of the School of Education at the Hebrew University, and of Hinda Eiger,
his student, who represented the spirit of the way in which cultural deprivation was
treated in the professional educational literature.
Cognitive images of damaged intelligence were bound up with cultural images of
backwardness and Mizrahi ‘‘eastern irrationality.’’ In the opinion of expert
educators, it was only natural that the so-called irrational Levantine culture would
give rise, in the ?eld of education, to a damaged cognitive structure characteristic of
irrational thinking whose family sources were based on a backward culture. Cultural
deprivation and its educational cognates combined with other social domains in
which the experts made an effort to create a hierarchical distinction between
problematic cultural expressions of the backward Levant and the standard social
patterns of the modern West.24 Moreover, cognitive imagery about intellectual
weakness was also integrated into professional perceptions and positions about
poverty and socio-economic distress that were identi?ed with the creators of
thinking deprivation.
To top this off, additional major characteristics attributed to culturally deprived
students related to the emotional and behavioral aspects of their personality. These
students were identi?ed as emotionally immature on the one hand and as displaying
criminal behavior on the other hand.25 The culturally deprived student was said to
‘‘be unable to withstand temptations and to delay grati?cation of disruptive needs’’
and that he has ‘‘a special negative attitude [to studies]’’ (Minkowitz 1969), that he
is egocentric, impulsive, and emotional (Stahl 1977), that he expresses no interest in
the act of learning for its own sake, since he has an instrumental approach to
learning (Nissan 1973), that ‘‘strong emotions interfere with his thinking’’ and
thereby blur the boundaries between them (Shmilowitz 1984a), and that he is
cunning (Stahl 1977), and has tendencies toward criminal behavior (Minkowitz
1969). These qualities, too, were understood as stemming from the cultural and
socio-economic context whose expression was interpreted as an outcome of the
negative in?uence of poverty, neglect, and a culture that was not modern.
In stark opposition to this, in the LD discourse, there is a complete disregard of
the cultural and socio-economic contexts as a relevant component in the
conceptualization or the construction of the disabilities.
So, under the aegis of the burgeoning discourse on cultural deprivation, its expert
proponents developed a kind of index of negative characteristics which related to
the various aspects of the culturally deprived student’s personality. With regard to
each aspect, ranges of personality weaknesses and defects were identi?ed which the
culturally deprived allegedly suffered from. The various qualities which composed
the imaginary pro?le of the culturally deprived together delineated a weak self with
defective functioning (Ben-Eliyahu 1976). The defects which characterized these
qualities were together identi?ed as symptoms of a defective self as noted by
Frankenstein (1969).26
In this way, the culturally deprived discourse produced a syndrome whose
environmental (cultural and socio-economic) roots are expressed in the personality
structure of those af?icted with it.27
Summarizing this part, the current article seeks to point out the fact that in
parallel to the drafting of the aforementioned cultural deprivation pro?le, there was
a simultaneous drafting of a clinical pro?le that eventually came to be known as
learning disabled. The representations of the ‘‘self’’ of both of these special
education subjects were produced as distinct and different. Whereas the culturally
deprived pro?le revolved around stigmatic characteristics interpreted connotatively
as negative along with a disempathic description of its subjects, the learning
disabled pro?le revolved, from the beginning, around largely similar characteristics
interpreted this time connotatively as positive stigma.28
Part Three: Between Parents and Experts
The Importance of Sensitivity to Parents
A repeated motif in the LDs discourse deals with the great sensitivity that must be
displayed in dealings with the parents of childrenwith dif?culties. Thevarious scholars
emphasized over and over the empathy they had for the parents’ concerns. They also
repeatedly instructed future practitioners to be sensitive to these worries. The explicit
statements about the importance of sensitivity were supported by a series of textual
mechanisms whose intertwiningcreated aconventional rhetoric of empathization with
parents, their children, and the suffering of both. Rhetorical mechanisms of
empathization were directed at minimizing negative connotations, whichwere usually
identi?ed with disabilities in the structure and function of the brain.29
Another central element which gave expression to the sensitivity and the
identi?cation of the experts with the parents of children with dif?culties can be
noted in the demoralization of learning problems and dif?culties in the discourse on
LDs. That is to say that in the framework of the new discourse, work was done on
the negation and intensive conversion of moral and normative idioms that at times
were identi?ed as factors relevant to the understanding of learning dif?culties in
children. Over and over again, writers emphasized that children with dif?culties
should not be related to as having tendencies of lack of motivation, lack of curiosity
or laziness. Demoralization was also given expression in relation to the role of
parents and the family. They were no longer to be considered guilty or responsible
for causing their child’s dif?culties.30
In contrast to pedagogical-moralistic theories, the ?rst experts on disabilities in
Israel claimed that the parents should be helped to rid themselves of possible guilt
feelings by uncovering the ‘‘real’’ reasons (that is to say, the biological ones) for the
disabilities. The development of the disability discourse was characterized by the
disappearance of moral indicators for disabilities; a disappearance that may have
eased the espousal of the discourse for many groups of parents.31
The Image of the Good Parent: The Adequate and Helper Parent
The LDs literature addressed the parents as if they were ‘‘every’’ parent, stripping
them of any particular markings of social and group af?liations. Nonetheless, the
texts contained a plethora of references, attitudes, comments, and remarks which
hinted at the real parent audience which has been identi?ed as relevant to the
disability discourse: ‘‘The parents are required to devote energy and time to provide
many motivational experiences to their children. Due to defective concentration and
listening, the child will not persevere in these activities alone, and he needs an adult
to encourage him and help him to persevere with his play. Only the parents can take
the child to the park, to the beach, on trips, and thereby give him the required trust,’’
stated Sharan and Sharan (1969), and other experts reiterated the need to devote
quality time to the children and how this contributed to their development. The
diverse recommendations hint at the parent population likely to be characterized by
certain entertainment and enrichment habits. Furthermore, this audience must be
endowed with the resources of free time (as well as economic resources) such that
the recommendations would be meaningful and implementable for them.
The parents were perceived as those that can and are expected to contribute their
time to the act of teaching itself and to developing the children’s basic skills: ‘‘The
parents must read age-appropriate books to their children from a very early age and
keep them interested. This activity should be part of everyday life and should be
pleasurable for both sides’’ (Darin 1984).32 They should lend a hand and help their
children in preparing them for exams or in guidance and practical assistance (Segal
1969). The home environment constitutes a complementary, essential, and integral
part of school instruction. Parents, identi?ed as ‘‘an in?uential factor in the progress
of the student’’, are required to select reading material or, at least, to help with their
reading, for the children’s independent work – materials like ‘‘articles from journals,
short stories, novels, and imaginative stories.’’
In order for parents to help their children scholastically in the best possible way,
they were certainly expected to keep up-to-date with professional literature
published in the ?eld of disabilities, and in general to insure that they were aware of
the knowledge building up in the ?eld. Segal (1969) had already stressed the
importance of ‘‘reading books, talking with other parents, participating in lectures
and obtaining professional guidance’’ as essential channels for parents to ‘‘acquire
suf?cient understanding and knowledge to give adequate help to the child.’’ Many
authors even add references to recommended literature and appendices containing
lists of books for the parents to consult.
The parents were required to help their children not only in the educational-
learning sense but also in emotional and social senses. That is to say that they were
tasked not only with learning and teaching in the academic sense but also with
studying the emotional, mental, behavioral, and social implications of their
children’s dif?culties, so that, as parents, it would be easier for them to understand,
to include, and to accept them. The many expectations and enormous hopes that the
experts assigned to the parents were accompanied by demands that they consult with
them frequently and that they should develop concepts about proper parenting.
Concurrently, normative claims began to surface from the parents, which addressed
their needs and even their obligation to develop skills in these ?elds (academic,
emotional, and social) so as to cope effectively with their learning disabled children.
For example, Margalit (1984) made it obligatory to develop training programs for
parents saying that ‘‘the change required of parents is a basic and protracted process,
which can be seen as the development of a new skill – the skill of effective
parenting.’’
So the image of the imagined parent was of a parent with intellectual,
motivational, emotional and social talent, able and encouraged (and more often
obligated) to learn the professional jargon and to be aided by it, although this was
modi?ed by the fact that he must receive close guidance and assistance from a
professional in the ?eld. In this way, the experts encouraged the inclusion and
integration of parents into the disability discourse while insuring themselves a
position of superiority in it by creating an obvious dependency on them on the part
of the parents who desire to update themselves frequently with the burgeoning
knowledge.
Parent–Expert Cooperation
The authors’ recommendations did not only relate to the ways in which the parents
ought to spend their free time with their children, whether it concerned their
methods of entertainment or their teaching methods or their emotional and social
formation within the home. The researchers also devoted much space in their
recommendations to the ways parents should maintain communication with various
educational entities on a regular basis: ‘‘The mutual relations between the home and
the school are important for the progress of the child. The teacher and the parents
must work in coordination so as to provide the child with a structured world in
which there are reciprocal relations between the classroom and extramural
activities… The parents of a brain-damaged child will often feel better if they
feel as though they are participating in the child’s education and training’’ (Simpson
1974).
The parents were identi?ed as potential partners in the act of education and
treatment (Darin et al. 1976), not only as individuals in relation to the education
system but also as a consolidated group (Segal 1969). In this way, various
researchers promoted the organization of groups of parents for emotional and
educational purposes at one and the same time. The parents’ cooperation with
systemic entities is perceived not only as a contributory factor in remedial teaching
but also as a central part of the success of the treatment.
The expectations and the recommendations of the experts that the parents should
become involved in the educational effort carried out at the school, is not surprising
given the identi?cation of these parents as erudite, and as people familiar with or
likely to become familiar with (even if only in potential) the professional jargon of
the experts and with the scienti?c-educational knowledge of the time.
Furthermore, many experts explicitly position the parents as their partners in real
understanding of the children’s dif?culties, and make themselves the allies of the
parents in their efforts to cope in the face of the refusal of the teachers and
the education system in general to acknowledge that LDs are the explanation for the
dif?culties.
The Good Parent as a Source of Finance
The expert discourse assigns the good parent an additional important function—
ongoing and long-term ?nancing of the disabled child’s treatment. Most of the
authors have repeatedly stressed the great importance of providing external teaching
assistance— that is assistance from private teachers and therapists who are not part
of the school system. This function has been repeated over and over from the
inception of the ?eld of disabilities in Israel and is expressed in writing thus:
‘‘Parents of learning disabled children are supposed to get in touch with remedial
teachers, teacher of extra lessons, counselors, doctors or nurses, and para-medical
therapists (speech therapists, occupational therapists, etc.)’’ (Segal 1969).
The works by Rivka Kidron, one of the leading ?gures who took it upon
themselves to develop awareness and policy in Israel for the ?eld of LDs through
advancing methods of remedial teaching, show the great importance the expert
discourse attaches to individual education: ‘‘Remedial teaching means teaching
aimed directly at the needs of the learner who does not manage to function as
expected of him in terms of his mental level and his scholastic achievements in the
classroom’’ (Kidron 1985).
For this reason, the expert discourse outlined the ?gure of the ideal parent: an
involved parent who devotes time and energy to the educational act, while at the
same time being aware of the importance of demarcating this involvement and
delegating the management and organization of the child with dif?culties to the
expert. Also, the parent is expected to devote his economic capital to the educational
effort on a regular basis. Funding private lessons for the child with dif?culties is
interpreted as part of the therapeutic act itself as it indicates sound parenting in that
it is identi?ed as an expression of worthy parental qualities like awareness of the
problem and concern for the child.33
Guilt and Responsibility
Since the parents are perceived as central factors with responsibility for the
character of the disabilities, they are also identi?ed with the theme and messages of
guilt. Parental guilt has complex and paradoxical manifestations in the disabilities
discourse. This is because, on the face of things, this discourse, which bases itself on
pathological assertions about objective brain science, makes old-fashioned theoret-
ical, psychological, and moralistic models redundant—models which found
indications of pathology in children with non-normative parental conduct.34 And
so, despite all this, the ?gure of the good parent emerges from the expert literature
as a ?gure of an active social agent that is commanded by means of the rhetoric of
responsibility and parental concern to keep track of the proper development of his
child and to really save him, if necessary.
Despite the doxic biological conceptualization of LDs (as nervous disorders
which have nothing to do with defective education or inappropriate environmental
conditions), the written works of the experts have created the moralistic imperative
(usually delicately formulated) whereby parents must take care of the proper
conduct of their children’s academic career as well as the appropriate management
of their cognition, emotions, and behavior. The parents’ lack of obedience, even
implied, is interpreted as a signi?cant factor in worsening the disabilities and in
causing the potential defects to become activated.
The discourse on disabilities shapes and re?ects the various models of
responsibility, including parental responsibility and the division of labor between
various social agents—private experts, state educational institutions, parents, and
the disabled. The textual analysis reveals the fact that the parents, as those
responsible for the failure of their children, are placed in positions that are often
susceptible to supervision, evaluation, and criticism on the part of the experts. The
ongoing sophistication of the experts in terms of therapeutic and pedagogical
models creates an abundance of age-speci?c prescriptions from which the parents
must learn rules of behavior and conversation with their children. The increase in
the amount of rules, as well as the warnings about the development of
malfunctioning if they are not abided by, creates a parent as someone who must
monitor and locate signs of learning problems and neutralize them. If he does not do
so, the signs are liable to show his guilt when the disability erupts. Normative
parenting thus requires the development of habitual tendencies of continual concern
for the child’s success and practical steps to remove and neutralize any obstacles for
achieving this along the way.
Seeking help from professionals is the recommended recourse for parents in
coping with the array of negative feelings, such as helplessness, guilt, worry, and
despair, which they may have at the beginning—the textual indicators of parental
responsibility and caring.
Universalization and Empathization
The dominant experts of the burgeoning LD ?eld stressed, from the very beginning,
the great importance of their obligation to being sensitive—not only in reference to
the care of the disabled child but also in reference to their various relationships with
that child’s parents and relatives. Narrativization of parental distress and suffering
was a central motif in that expert literature. Indeed, this motif has been intertwined
throughout the LD literature since the 1960s. Moreover, various kinds of textual
mechanisms that were integrated into this narrativization of distress and suffering
have contributed in total to produce an empathic climate in which readers of that
literature are immersed.
Another central component which typi?ed the attitude of the experts toward the
parents was expressed in the textual structuring of the parent as an imaginary ?gure
of a universal ‘‘every parent.’’ The qualities and conduct of this ‘‘every parent,’’ in
relation to the disabled child, to other family members, to experts, and to the
education system, were presented as natural, standard, expected, and required of
every responsible and caring parent.
In a parallel and complementary fashion, this literature was characterized by the
blurring and elimination of every social, class, and cultural characteristic of these
parents. The legitimacy for this nulli?cation of the context came from the
reductionist biological models that were enlisted to clarify the pathologies under
discussion. Therefore, it became trivial to draw parental ?gures as schematic and
detached from any context, though they were signposted as empathic modi?ers.
Problematic Parents of the Culturally Deprived
In contrast to the universal construction of the parents of the child with brain
damage, and as opposed to the conventional rhetoric of empathization which was
associated with this construction, in the cultural deprivation discourse, the parental
?gures were de?ned by means of particular ethnic, class, and cultural signi?ers,
using disempathic rhetoric. Rather than the ‘‘every parent’’ of the brain damage
discourse, the parents of the culturally deprived were perceived as being able to
operate in a limited number of social con?gurations—ethnic, class, and cultural
ones. Hence, from the ?rst, the discourse on cultural deprivation was characterized
by particularization of the parental image which was its object. It also created a
separation between the social groups they belonged to and groups identi?ed as
normative.
Parents of culturally deprived children were described as un?t in many ways
(intellectually, motivationally, in terms of language, emotionally and socially) to
help with advancing their children. The various researchers emphasized the
dysfunctionality of the parents of culturally deprived children, as well as their
inability to extricate themselves autonomously from this condition of dysfunction-
ality.35 These parents of culturally deprived children were described as having
negative qualities such as pessimism and defeatism.
Often, the psychopathologizing and disempathic description of the parents was
outspoken: ‘‘The reason for this form of disturbance in the intelligence activity [of
the culturally deprived child – O.K.] is to be found in the social and spiritual
functioning of the environment. Here the reference is to insuf?cient motherly love,
limited care-giving and above all the parents’ cultural inadequacy, poverty and
primitiveness, which deprive them of the capacity to train, exercise and more
importantly to expand effective social contacts,’’ explained Sachs (1971) adding
that since ‘‘he cannot rely on anyone [in relation to the culturally deprived child –
O.K.] he cannot be relied on either.’’
The descriptions of the mothers and fathers were typically pathologized and there
was sometimes even demonization of the family. Sachs (1971) describes the
mothers in culturally deprived families thus: ‘‘These are schizoid depressive
women.’’ He goes on to distinguish between several ‘‘typical mothering types’’ in
these families. ‘‘The mother who is not yet mature enough for motherhood. She is
not capable of devoting herself to the child while making concessions.’’ ‘‘The
ambivalent mother alternates between loving and rejecting the child,’’ ‘‘the
disharmonic, unstable mother.’’
The paternal pro?le is presented in clinical terms:
There is also the domineering father who works outside the home and thinks he
deserves his quiet time and that dealing with children is the role of the mother only.
Usually, it is the father who arouses fear: irritable, aggressive. His family bears the
brunt of his disappointment at his failures at work and trembles before him (Sachs
1971).
He goes on to mention ‘‘[the father’s] rudeness, lack of control, manner of talking
to the mother…excessive drinking, beating of the mother…’’
Indeed, most of the descriptions of family and parents of the culturally deprived
did not get to the point of demonization as described above, but they, nevertheless,
were characterized by psychopathologization of the families and by disempathic
descriptions of the parents. The weak father ?gure (Ezbe’oni 1984) and the distant
mother ?gure (Eiger 1977) frequently presented the linkage between cultural
deprivation and the pathological qualities of the parents in these families.
Hence, not only were the parents perceived as unquali?ed to help with solving
the problem of lack of care but also in most cases they were perceived as
exacerbating the problem and as the main cause of it. The parents were found not to
be available for meaningful connections with their children and as being able to
maintain only limited interaction with them (Etzbe’oni 1984). This kind of
interaction would be likely to cause great harm in the formation of the self of the
culturally deprived child, who was deprived of standard parental in?uence
(Frankenstein 1977). The parents were presented as only sparingly reinforcing
and supporting their children and thereby harming their proper development
(Minkowitz 1969). ‘‘The mother of the average distressed family spends little time
relating to the child and does not develop in him a feeling of closeness,’’ stressed
Ashkenazi (1978). This absence of the feeling of closeness was expressed, in his
view, in damaged development of thinking and perception of the environment. This
position, whereby the problematic conduct of parents toward their children served as
one of the major factors in the sub-standard cognitive development of the latter, was
widespread among the experts on cultural deprivation. Thus, important experts like
Minkowitz (1969), Frankenstein (1970), and Eiger and Kunik (1977), emphasized
the destructive developmental repercussions for the children, that could be
attributed to the relationship between parents and their children.
The professional literature emphasized two major series of causal links as
responsible for the evolving of cultural deprivation: the one highlighted the cultural
and socio-economic factors, and the other emphasized the clinical characteristics of
the families. These two series were not mutually exclusive; they were usually
employed concurrently and mutually as explanations for the evolving of cultural
deprivation. The phrase coined by the experts, ‘‘poverty and primitiveness,’’ was
used to discuss the diseased character of these two factors.
The non-standard development and the development of the symptomatology of
cultural deprivation were perceived not only as being grounded in economic distress
and cultural backwardness but also as a consequence of problematic, non-normative
parental mediation. An example of this appears in Simon (1966) who relates to
parents as members of a sub-culture: ‘‘It is true that they are objectively needy, but
they may also enjoy their regressive dependence and may be exaggerating their
symptoms beyond what is necessary.’’ To the extent that the parents do this, they are
not ful?lling their normative educational role, but, through their actions, they are
expressing ‘‘that pedagogical suicide arising from their arti?cial infantilization.’’
We have found that, in the discourse on cultural deprivation in relation to the
parents, there are particular outlines of the ethnic origins and class as well as the
(negative) character of socialization in their family. This duality allows the experts to
assert, on the one hand, that cultural deprivation is a product of cultural and socio-
economic factors which helped to create, preserve, and reproduce the identi?cation
between cultural deprivation and Mizrahi origin and low class (thus assisting in the
creation and preservation of the establishment’s distinction between these popula-
tions and modern Western civilization that is associated with the establishment).
On the other hand, the concrete discussions of the negative qualities of the
parents as the missing link which was critical in activating the cultural deprivation
syndrome enabled the experts to focus the blame on parents for this development.
As the parents are constructed and understood as being to blame for the faltering of
their children, the experts and the establishment are likely to rid themselves of
responsibility for realistic policy to remedy the gaps and social distress. In any
event, for our purposes, the textual construction of the parents of the culturally
deprived as being responsible and to blame for the cognitive, motivational,
emotional, and behavioral behavior of the children, is important. This is despite the
fact that the discourse on cultural deprivation highlights contextual categories of
class and ethnic origin—explanatory categories which seem to negate na??ve
perceptions about blame and the failure or lagging of their children.
This formation of parental blame, which was established by relating to the
categories of poverty and culture, is expressed by Eiger (basing herself on the theory
of Frankenstein):
According to Frankenstein, an orientation is created among poor people about
their de?ciency as well as what they might have one day (‘‘the haveable’’) which
prevents the individual from adopting an autonomous attitude to the world. The
relationship to the immediate and the real reinforces in the individual the fact that he
is a thing subject to the randomness and arbitrariness of external conditions; as a
result, he does not get to the point of confrontation and coping with reality, events,
and the people in his world. This is the source of the impersonal relationship of the
poverty-stricken parents toward their child. These parents treat the child like an
object in terms of ful?lling their role toward him and in regard to the expectations
they have of him [Emphasis added]
Furthermore, she claims that ‘‘in primitive cultures, the factor that weakens the
personal relationship on the part of the parents is the absolute authority of tradition.
Life in a closed system of beliefs, unequivocal values and ?xed behavior patterns
limits theopportunities forthe individualselfto developandin its stead there develops
a collective selfin connectionwith which the individualfeels himself tobe an object.’’
According to Eiger, parents of culturally deprived children shaped the weak,
passive self among their children: ‘‘The correlation between the weakness of the self
and the culture of poverty and primitive cultures is a consequence of the quality of
the parents’ attitude to the child’’ (1975). In general, the various studies allow us to
outline a very problematic pro?le of a parent of a culturally deprived child. This
pro?le places the latter in a negative light, to say the least—the characteristics
associated with him in the literature include cognitive characteristics (obstinacy,
lack of logic, lack of education, ignorance, and low achievement); personal
characteristics (lack of belief in his own strength, passivity, low frustration
threshold, and insecurity); family characteristics (lack of understanding of family
needs, lack of emotional relationship with the children and spouse, authoritarianism
on the part of the father, and submissiveness on the part of the mother); and other
characteristics (cultural backwardness, reduced connection with the surrounding
culture, and dependence on external authority).
Attempts to minimize the implications of the pathologization of the portrayal do
nothing to blur the psychopathologization. An example is Eiger’s remark that the
impersonal attitude to the child does not mean that the parents do not express love,
affection, or concern for their children, but because of the weak self of the parents,
the expression of emotion is impulsive, uncontrolled, and lacking in constancy
which is the reason for the rapid transitions from love to rage, from neglect to
devotion, etc. This attitude does not allow the child to feel the constancy of the
parents’ attitude and so he is not able to internalize it (Eiger 1975).
The parent of a culturally deprived child is identi?ed, on the one hand, with
Mizrahi ethnic origin and lower class, and, on the other hand, his self is stigmatized
through a rich index of negative psychological indicators. The words poverty and
Mizrahi-ness were used in written works as indications of backward cultures.
Another rhetorical mechanism, which emphasized, even more, the problematic
qualities of parents of culturally deprived children, was the textual juxtaposition of
the backward types of parents with the normative types of parents—a juxtaposition
which aided in their mutually opposing formation. Thus, for example, under the
sub-section on parents in a faltering population, Avni (1978) claimed that parents of
students from the established–developed population36 are usually a positive and
stimulating factor in the education of their children and encourage their studies.
They also know how to assess correctly the importance of proper relations between
the school and the parents; hence, they themselves initiate activities to strengthen
this connection by visiting the school, the principal, the teacher, or the nurse through
constructive activity on the parents’ committee, etc. Conversely, the student being
raised in a deprived environment does not always bene?t from scholastic
encouragement and stimulation from his parents. At times he encounters apathy,
and at times his parents deny him regular learning conditions through over-using
him in services and chores in the home.
This is a distorted re?ection in which the parents are presented as backward and
not ful?lling their parental and pedagogic role.
As stated, an explicit juxtaposition between the two types of parents (as well as
between the two types of psychopathologies) in the literature is rare. To a large
extent, the Mizrahi parents were identi?ed as being to blame for their children’s
backwardness. It is paradoxical that these parents were found to be responsible for
their children’s failure because the cultural deprivation discourse itself emphasized
the class and cultural marginalization of these parents in the social structure and
blurred the socio-critical potential by its very presence and emphasis on this
structural marginalization.
In well-known senses, the discourse on cultural deprivation is antithetical to that of
brain damageand, later,to thatofLDs.Thelatterproposed a different special education
taxonomy. They laid emphasis on the biological elements in the act of explicating
learning and behavioral dif?culties among children. As mentioned, they also
emphasized the importance of expert sensitivity for the parents’ distress and asserted
that there was no parental blame or responsibility in the engendering of disabilities.37
The two discourses exemplify two distinct types of parental cultures of blame
and responsibility: The LDs discourse re?ects an inclusive and integrative model of
blame and responsibility. The parents are not causally blamed for engendering their
child’s disability, but still they are responsible for the management of that disability,
whereas the cultural deprivation discourse re?ects an exclusive model of blame and
responsibility—the parents are causally blamed for engendering their child’s
disability, while not being responsible for the management of that disability. Both of
the discourses assign a central but different role to the parents due to the parents’
important position as mediators between the public spheres of the medical and
educational discourse and the private sphere of the family.38
The references of the experts’ texts within the LDs discourse to the emotional world
refer also purportedly to every parent. The emotional signi?ers’ index outlines,
seemingly, the deserving ?gure of the universal ‘‘every parent.’’ However, it is, in
effect, based on the emotional formation (and its practical derivatives) of a social
group distinguished by class, culture, and language,39 that social class that
habitually associates the description of ‘‘transparent’’ parents with speci?c social
characteristics. Thus, normative parenting is a moral imperative as well as the
possible privilege of a distinct group of parents, a potential group of readers on the
imaginary horizon of expert literature—a group that can be located within class,
cultural, and language boundaries despite its being composed of a collection of
individuals. The good parent is portrayed by means of a series of cognitive,
behavioral, emotional, and personal characteristics. This parent is designated as
intellectually, motivationally, emotionally, and socially capable of understanding
the child’s dif?culties, able to learn the professional language of disabilities experts
and even to cooperate with them in the act of education. In the descriptions of and
references to parenting found in the literature, a picture can be drawn of its
characteristics as natural, as it were, as literate (i.e., in command of the high
registers of language, written and spoken), as cultured (i.e., as possessing a rich
collection of knowledge and having the intention of investing in academic
enrichment), as intelligent, ambitious (like his child as oriented to a successful life)
and as one who conducts an enriched lifestyle (cinema, museums, leisure-time
conversations, and other similar practices) all of which have therapeutic
signi?cance. This parent is even characterized as possessing a series of emotions
and sensitivities that enable him to aid in the empowerment of his child vis-a?-vis the
education establishment and also to enlist the assistance of experts without being
rejected or negated by them. The absolute majority of the writers tended to blur and
obliterate class, social and cultural characteristics of the families they described.
This blurring and obliteration were aided by the ethics of the discipline that obliged
anonymity for those mentioned in the various books, publications, and reports. This
code of ethics makes it dif?cult to locate in the writings direct and explicit
attribution of class and social af?liation of the families mentioned. In this way, it
assists in the encryption of the social strati?cation and cultural classi?cation of the
studies conducted and reported in the research and professional literature. The class
and cultural boundaries of the objects written about can be explicitly uncovered
only from laconic and incidental remarks related to the profession, to place of
residence or to leisure-time culture of one family or another. For example, Segal
(1969), in referring to groups of parents of the learning disabled and to their
capabilities, he emphasizes the importance of pressure groups on educational
decision makers and the strength of their potential in?uence by making an incidental
comment: ‘‘In every group of parent – as in every group of people – one can ?nd a
broad spectrum of professions: lawyers, doctors, writers, and publicists.’’ From
writings like these, a picture is drawn of the ‘‘core consumers’’ of the disabilities
discourse in the Israeli context, as referring to established and educated groups
(historically Ashkenazi and well-established), who are able to derive social bene?t
from the services of experts in LDs. However, in most of the written works, these
social contours were completely blurred and were replaced by individual
characteristics. This substitution facilitated the identi?cation of parents from
special social groups as potential ‘‘natural’’ partners of the experts without there
being any explicit mention in the discourse of their social characteristics. In this
manner, the experts succeeded in a textual construction of the symbolization of
universal unity (the presentation of ‘‘every parent’’) and at the same time in
con?ning their expertise to those socially distinguishable parents whose so-called
individual qualities were valid for them.
Based on these qualities, in effect, established, educated parents are identi?ed in
the expert literature, as potential, natural partners, not only in individual therapy for
the disabled children but also in studying and dissemination the body of knowledge
about LD itself. Not every parent was able to be a partner for the experts in therapy,
consultation, learning, and dissemination of the discourse. In order to undertake this,
he was required to adopt and develop characteristics of an ‘‘every parent’’.
However, not every parent was found to be suitable for this, culturally,
economically, intellectually, and even morally. This ?gure could serve as a role
model only for those established and educated social groups in whose image it was
shaped in the ?rst place. In this way, a justi?cation was provided for the expert
discourse to create conceptual, professional, and institutional distinctions between
the objects of therapy relevant to experts on disabilities and those to whom other
therapeutic logics ought to apply. This appearance of discursive, conceptual
distinctions, and professional and institutional division of labor—valid for social,
ethnic, and class distinctions—serves as the historical case study of the discourse on
cultural deprivation in Israel.
Summary
In summary, it seems that under the aegis of the two discourses, both the cultural
deprivation and the LDs ones, two special educational tracks developed in Israel.
The two tracks de?ned differentially the likelihood of their distinct populations to
succeed or, conversely, to fail.40 The two tracks formed and organized around
different representations of the ‘‘self’’ that were attributed to the populations that
served as their subjects of study: The cultural deprivation track was organized
around a contaminated self (cognitively, morally and behaviorally). The brain-
damaged track (eventually the LDs track) was organized around a rehabilitated self
in these respects.
The logics (raisons d’etre) of the two tracks can be explained in terms of
contrasting educational ideas. The logic of the cultural deprivation track can be
characterized as an evolutionary idea of progress (the children are to be advanced as
far as possible, although the disabilities are not totally reparable). The logic of the
LD track can be characterized as a mechanistic idea of correction (the disabilities or
rather the disabilities’ manifestations are reparable).
That is, the cultural deprivation discourse re?ected and expressed evolutionary
pedagogical trends by which the support to be given to culturally deprived children
was of great importance, even though it was to be expected that their level of
development (educationally speaking—their abilities, capacities, and as a result
their achievements) would be limited. The reason for that limitation stems from the
cultural, socio-economic, and familial in?uences that shaped those children from
their infancy. These in?uences were assumed to have made an impression on their
self and would not be totally reparable (or reversible).
As opposed to that, the LDs discourse re?ected and expressed corrective
pedagogical trends by which suitable instruction and care can ?x the disabilities or
at least neutralize their problematic manifestations. Therefore, there was in that case
an expectation that despite the existence of the disabilities, proper instruction could
remove any limitation onthechild’sfuture achievements (the severity of the disability
notwithstanding). And in regard to the learning disabled children’s abilities and
capacities, these children purportedly had no anomalous cultural, socio-economic, or
familial history. Therefore, an adequate enough mechanistic intervention could
uncover those abilities and capacities (without regard to their degree of severity).
The progress idea was embedded in a phylogenetic perception of human
development. In the cultural deprivation discourse, it was not possible to separate
the child’s defective self from the problematic environmental circles which
surrounded it. That child’s dif?culties (as well as their origins) were not his alone
but were rather part of a broad backward population. The danger immanent in such a
problematic child is not manifested only (or mainly) in his future failures but also in
the negative in?uences of these failures on society at large. That being the case, the
treatment methods had to provide an answer to a collective problem, not just to an
individual problem of this or that child. Moreover, since the problem was perceived
as collective, it was not an option to ?nd an overall solution to the problem of the
individual child. Only a structural and systematic treatment of the backward
populations—a treatment whose aim was to ameliorate them over time—could
eventually be manifested in the form of a child having an unblemished self.
The correction notion was embedded in an ontogenetic perception of human
development. The child’s defective self was examined in light of psychological
theories and developmental models that focused on the developmental phases of that
particular human individual from birth, on dif?culties and deviations from the
normal stages, and on adequate treatment methods. That child’s dif?culties (as well
as their origins) were self-contained, and hence it was possible to locate, isolate and
‘‘surgically’’ ?x them. Because of that, the aim of the treatment was ?rst to advance
the child’s development (in the ontogenetic-particular sense) as an individual, to
speed up that development, or to remove the barriers placed by the disabilities
before that development.
The phylogenetic understanding of the dif?culties of the culturally deprived was
manifested, therefore, in identifying these dif?culties as qualitatively different from
similar (and also from seemingly identical) dif?culties of children who did not
belong to the culturally deprived population (i.e., cultured or normal children as
conceived by the experts). So, culturally deprived children were socially constructed
as essentially different from other children.
The ontogenetic understanding of the dif?culties of the learning disabled was
manifested, on the other hand, in identifying these dif?culties as mere statistical
variants on a mainly normative developmental continuum. It is true that at times
there could be found among some learning disabled children severe deviations from
or signi?cant delays in the expected normal development. But still, even in these
severe cases, the children’s dif?culties were identi?ed as only quantitatively
different from the dif?culties of non-disabled children. The dif?culties also were
conceptualized as only technical and not as essential. Thus, learning disabled
children oxymoronically were socially constructed as normal children in all senses
even though they suffered from disabilities.
The two special educational tracks, the two self-images that were formed within
their framework, as well as the diverse educational ideas and the different
development conceptualizations that characterized them, re?ected historically the
unequal and hierarchical ethno-class social structure of Israeli society, at the same
time that they were contributing to its social reproduction.
The expectations and recommendations of the experts should be viewed in the
broader educational and social context—during the 1960s, a segregationist
educational policy was engendered in Israel; a policy which has became the
prevailing one (Ziv 1980). Since the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 and
up to the 1960s, the educational ideology of equality in education was dominant.
The meaning of this was that, theoretically at least, there were equal conditions and
equal curricula in all of the schools (Ziv 1980). Many have written about the
formation of the segregationist educational ideology during the 1960s focusing
mainly on the now discredited discourse of cultural deprivation. That ideology
developed against the background of the incoming waves of immigration to Israel
from states which were conceived as backward, the negative perceptions of many of
the immigrants on the part of the indigenous population, and the widespread local
public belief in the validity of the I.Q. test.41
The simultaneous existence of the LDs discourse (a discourse that emerged in
Israel in those very years) highlights an otherwise hidden aspect in the historical
formation of the aforementioned segregationist ideology: The currently rejected
widely critiqued cultural deprivation category did not emerge in an educational
vacuum devoid of alternative patho-educational conceptualizations. It was the
brain-damaged category (that eventually became the LDs category) which emerged
simultaneously serving as a contrasting category to it. Subjects divided historically
by ethnicity, and class were re?ected and produced in this alternative LDs category.
It seems that this special education track of LDs could have been to a large extent
the historical parallel of the cultural deprivation track. That is to say that the LDs
track tended to serve mainly the Ashkenazi, well-established, educated, and well-off
population.42 It seems that the LDs track was used as a special education alternative
for the strong parents.
Conclusion: Differential Expectations
Distinct etiological attributions as well as differential interpretations of identical
symptomatology reinforced the experts’ prognostic expectations and practical and
policy recommendations regarding how the children with dif?culties should be dealt
with and also re?ected those expectations and recommendations. The critical
literature is full of descriptions of the low expectations of the educational experts of
the culturally deprived children. These low expectations are associated in that
literature with the term ‘‘the Pygmalion effect’’ which negatively contributed to the
defective molding of these children in the image of their widespread negative
imageries. In accordance with this, the destructive policy consequences suited to
these experts’ positions regarding the culturally deprived population were exten-
sively discussed in written texts.
‘‘The question is raised [remarked Darin as early as 1971- O.K.] by many
specialists in remedial teaching: what is the difference between the remedial
teaching of language, reading, writing and arithmetic dif?culties originating in
abnormalities of the functioning of the brain, and the remedial teaching of
learning dif?culties originating in an environmental background?’’ And, in the
same vein, we can broaden the question and consider whether there were any
differences between the expectations of experts of culturally deprived children and
their expectations of learning disabled children? If indeed, there were such
differences we should ponder how, they manifested themselves. Moreover,
attention should be paid to the differences in the recommendations for methods of
care and assistance.
In retrospect, it is surprising to realize what a large difference there was between
the expectations of the disabilities experts regarding the children who had
dif?culties assessed as being based on an organic background and their expectations
regarding the culturally deprived children. More often than not, the dif?culties
described were the same dif?culties, the failures were the same failures, and the
clinical picture was also identical in both cases. However, while concerning the
culturally deprived children, the disabilities experts adopted the customary and
accepted motifs ‘‘failure expected in advance’’ and ‘‘the need to lower expecta-
tions,’’ concerning the learning disabled children they adopted different motifs.
Concerning these LD children, they developed a positive stance aided by idioms,
motifs, and argumentations that were embedded in the semantic ?eld of success. It
appears that the boundaries of the individual potential were understood, concep-
tualized, and constructed very differently in the two cases.
While the ?rst special education track served many children as an exclusive route
that relegated them to the margins of society, the second special educational track
served other children in a different way, seemingly (even only potentially) as a
supportive, inclusive, and integrative route. Whereas the educational and social
manifestations of the ?rst track were extensively examined and studied, the
educational and social manifestations of the second track still wait for research and
examination.
