Title:
Dietary Behaviors and Incident COVID-19 in the UK Biobank

Abstract:
 Background: Nutritional status in?uences immunity but its speci?c association with susceptibility to COVID-19 remains unclear. We examined the association of speci?c dietary data and incident COVID-19 in the UK Biobank (UKB). Methods: We considered UKB participants in England with self-reported baseline (2006–2010) data and linked them to Public Health England COVID-19 test results—performed on samples from combined nose/throat swabs, using real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)—between March and November 2020. Baseline diet factors included breastfed as baby and speci?c consumption of coffee, tea, oily ?sh, processed meat, red meat, fruit, and vegetables. Individual COVID-19 exposure was estimated using the UK’s average monthly positive case rate per speci?c geo-populations. Logistic regression estimated the odds of COVID-19 positivity by diet status adjusting for baseline socio-demographic factors, medical history, and other lifestyle factors. Another model was further adjusted for COVID-19 exposure. Results: Eligible UKB participants (n = 37,988) were 40 to 70 years of age at baseline; 17% tested positive for COVID-19 by SAR-CoV-2 PCR. After multivariable adjustment, the odds (95% CI) of COVID-19 positivity was 0.90 (0.83, 0.96) when consuming 2–3 cups of coffee/day (vs. <1 cup/day), 0.88 (0.80, 0.98) when consuming vegetables in the third quartile of servings/day (vs. lowest quartile), 1.14 (1.01, 1.29) when consuming fourth quartile servings of processed meats (vs. lowest quartile), and 0.91 (0.85, 0.98) when having been breastfed (vs. not breastfed). Associations were attenuated when further adjusted for COVID-19 exposure, but patterns of associations remained. Conclusions: In the UK Biobank, consumption of coffee, vegetables, and being breastfed as a baby were favorably associated with incident COVID-19; intake of processed meat was adversely associated. Although these ?ndings warrant independent con?rmation, adherence to certain dietary behaviors may be an additional tool to existing COVID-19 protection guidelines to limit the spread of this virus. 
----------------------


Text:
----------------------
Coronavirus (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 that predom-
inantly attacks the respiratory system and has spread rapidly in the last year [1]. This
unprecedented global public health crisis necessitates the expansion of our understanding
of COVID-19 for purposes of prevention and mitigation of its severity and mortality risk in
infected individuals [2].
Cross-sectional analyses identify patient characteristics and clinical data subsequent
to a positive test, thereby informing the progression and severity of COVID-19. However,
identifying factors underlying potential susceptibility a priori to the virus offers public
health bene?ts. The immune system plays a key role in an individual’s susceptibility
and response to infectious diseases, including COVID-19 [3,4]. A major modi?able factor
affecting immune function is dietary behavior that in?uences nutritional status [5–7].
Ecological studies of COVID-19 report favorable correlations with speci?c vegetables
and dietary patterns, such as the Mediterranean diet [8–10]. Some dietary supplements
were found to have an association with SARS-CoV-2 infection [11]. To our knowledge,
no population data have been examined regarding the role of speci?c dietary intakes in
prevention of COVID-19.
Using data from the UK Biobank (UKB), we examined the associations between dietary
behaviors measured in 2006–2010 and incident COVID-19 infection in 2020. We additionally
linked UKB geo-data to UK COVID-19 surveillance data to account for COVID-19 exposure
in our analyses, which to our knowledge has never been done in COVID-19 studies of
the UKB.
2.1. UK Biobank
The UKB is an international health resource of over 500,000 participants aged 37–73 years
at 22 centers across England, Wales, and Scotland. Details of the study methods have
been described previously [12]. Brie?y, participants underwent physical measurements,
assessments about health and risk factors (including lifestyle and dietary behaviors), and
blood sampling at baseline (2006–2010) and agreed to follow-up on their health status.
Details of data collected are provided on the Showcase tab of the UKB website [13]. UKB
ethical approval was from the National Research Ethics Service Committee North West–
Haydock (approval letter dated 17 June 2011, Ref 11/NW/0382), and all study procedures
were performed in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki
ethical principles for medical research. The current analysis was approved under the UKB
application #21394 (PI, M.C.C).
2.2. COVID-19 Diagnosis
COVID-19 test results from Public Health England have been dynamically linked to
the UKB since 16 March 2020 [14]. The regularly updated COVID-19 data table provided
to UKB researchers includes participant ID, record date, test location (mouth, nose, throat,
trachea, etc.), testing laboratory (71 labs listed), and test results (negative or positive). The
vast majority of samples tested are from combined nose/throat swabs that are transported
in a medium suitable for viruses and subject to polymerase chain reaction testing.
2.3. COVID-19 Exposure
UKB provides grid co-ordinate data at the 1 km resolution as a measure of residential
location [15]. The data are provided to researchers in the projection of the Ordnance Survey
National Grid (OSGB1936) geographic reference system; measures refer to easting and
northing with a reference point near the Isles of Sicily. These data were used in conjunction
with country-wide surveillance data to identify UKB participants exposed to COVID-19 [16].
The UKB geo-data and UK COVID-19 surveillance data was imported and projected in Ar-
cGIS (Environmental Systems Research Institute, Redlands, CA, USA) for visual inspection.
To make the UKB geo-data (North/East) compatible with the latitude/longitude surveil-
lance data, we converted the former to the latter using standard equations already built
into ArcGIS [17]. Hotspot analysis was performed on the UK surveillance data to assign
values (“Gi*” statistic) back to each UKB participant representing a COVID-19-exposure
risk factor or score. We calculated monthly positive case rates per speci?c geo-populations,
and the average of these monthly rates was used in the analysis.
2.4. Baseline Dietary Data
The UKB touchscreen at baseline included a semi-quantitative food frequency ques-
tionnaire (FFQ) that assessed self-reported usual intake of 17 foods and beverages [18].
Participants were asked to report the number of pieces/tablespoons/cups of each item they
consumed or to choose one of several pre-speci?ed frequency categories. Among these
choices, baseline servings of vegetables (cooked, raw), fruit (fresh, dried), oily ?sh, pro-
cessed meat, red meat (beef, lamb/mutton, or pork), tea, and coffee have speci?cally been
identi?ed as contributing nutritional factors implicated in immunity [19–24] and were thus
targeted for consideration in this study. The details of the questions and possible answers
for these diet factors are provided in Supplemental Table S1. Based on the participants’
responses, we computed portion sizes as cups or servings per day. Participants were also
asked if they were breastfed as a baby and responded yes, no, or don’t know.
2.5. Other Covariates
Age, sex, race, education, employment status, type of accommodation lived in and
number of co-habitants, smoking behaviors, and current health status were self-reported
at baseline using the touchscreen. Townsend Deprivation Index, a measure of SES, was
derived using census data and postal codes of participants, where higher scores represent
higher deprivation. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated using height and weight
measured at the assessment center. Physical activity was assessed using questions adapted
from the validated short International Physical Activity Questionnaire [25]. Participants
wereaskedhowmanyminutestheyengagedineachoftheactivitiesonatypicalday.
Duration of moderate and vigorous activities (minutes/day) was used in this analysis.
History of diabetes, history of any heart diseases, and hypercholesterolemia or hypertensive
medication use were obtained via self-reporting (and veri?ed during a verbal interview)
and hospital databases.
Because individuals with lung diseases may have an increased risk of COVID-19 infec-
tion [26], we further classi?ed participants by their pre-existing compromised pulmonary
function (yes/no respiratory diseases excluding common colds); data extracted from health
records during follow-up. We also used health records to calculate incident diabetes and
heart disease.
2.6. Analysis Sample
Because no COVID-19 test data were available for UKB assessment centers in Scotland
and Wales, only participants in England were included. For this analysis, we included
participants with test results between 16 March and 30 November 2020, which was before
vaccines were rolled out in the UK (8 December 2020) [27]. There were 74,878 tests per-
formed on 42,699 UKB participants. We excluded participants who had missing baseline
data on nutritional factors and covariates (n = 4711). The ?nal study sample included
37,988 UKB participants (Supplemental Figure S1).
2.7. Statistical Analysis
All analyses were performed using SAS (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Mapping
was performed using ArcGIS. F-tests or ?2 tests were used to compare differences in
baseline characteristics across participants’ age and race/ethnicity.
Our main outcome of interest was whether a person had any con?rmed COVID-19
infection (de?ned as having any positive test result). Our exposures of interest included
consumption of coffee, tea, oily ?sh, processed meat, red meat, fruit, and vegetables; and
were analyzed in quartiles of servings/d [each modeled: lowest quartile/Q1(referent), Q2,
Q3, and Q4] as well as tea and coffee [each modeled: none or <1 (referent), 1, 2–3, and
?4 cups/d], and breastfed as a baby [yes (referent), no, and don’t know]. Because the
cut-points to de?ne Q2 and Q3 for oily ?sh were similar, Q3 and Q4 were combined.
We examined the association between each dietary behavior and incident COVID-19
using logistic regression, ?rst adjusting for age, sex, and race (White/Asian/Black/Mixed-
Others) (Crude model), then further adjusting for Townsend-deprivation index (quartiles),
education (6 quali?cation classes), employment status (employed/retired/other), type of
living accommodation (house/apartment/other), number of co-habitants (1,2,3 or ?4),
income (4 levels), physical activity (quartiles of moderate or vigorous activities, min/day),
smoking (never/past/current), BMI (<25, 25–<30, and ?30 kg/m2), self-rated health (ex-
cellent/good/fair/poor), hypercholesterolemia medication use (yes/no), hypertensive
medication use (yes/no), diabetes (yes/no), and any heart diseases (yes/no) (Model 1).
Model 2 was similar to Model 1 but with diet behaviors assessed mutually (i.e., including
all 7 other dietary factors). Model 3 included variables from Model 2 and further adjusted
for COVID-19 exposure score. Finally, Model 4 further adjusted for pre-existing compro-
mised pulmonary function (yes/no). Statistical signi?cance was de?ned as p < 0.05. No
adjustments were made for multiple testing as all tests were a priori.
In sensitivity analyses, we excluded individuals self-reporting diabetes, heart diseases,
or using cholesterol-lowering or antihypertension medication because they may recently
have made dietary changes consequential to the disease. We also adjusted for incident
diabetes and heart disease during follow-up. Moreover, as shown in Supplemental Fig-
ure S2, there were two waves of new cases between March and November 2020 (i.e., from
March–August 2020, or Wave 1, and September–November 2020, or Wave 2) in the UK,
with greater numbers in Wave 2 than Wave 1. The differences may re?ect a change in
testing-rate, a true change in risk of exposure to the virus or some other factor. Regardless,
analyses were also conducted for Wave 1 and Wave 2 separately.
We screened for effect modi?cation (interaction) by sex (male or female), age (<55
or ?55 years of age) and race (White, Asian, Black, or mixed/others) by including the
cross-product term of each nutritional factor (e.g., coffee consumption, 4 categories) and
the interacting variable in multivariable regression models. Statistically signi?cant inter-
actions were de?ned as p < 0.002; accounting for 24 tests (8 nutrition factors × 3 effect
modi?ers) performed.
3.1. Participant Characteristics
Of 37,988 eligible participants who were tested for COVID-19 from March to Novem-
ber 2020, 6482 (17%) tested positive. In general, participants in the analysis sample had
baseline demographic and diet characteristics similar to those of the full UKB cohort
(N = 502,633, Table 1). However, those in the analysis sample tended to report poorer
health and more comorbidities than those in the full UKB cohort.
Characteristics of the analysis sample, strati?ed by baseline age and race, are presented
in Supplemental Tables S2 and S3. Brie?y, compared to the older age group, the younger
age group tended to be female, employed, and better educated, with better income and
rated better health; they also tended to consume less tea, fruit, vegetables, ?sh, and red
meat, with fewer having been breastfed. Compared to non-white participants, white
participants tended to consume more coffee, tea, processed meat, less fruit or vegetables,
with fewer having been breastfed. Among non-whites, Black people tended to live in
higher deprivation areas, be employed, have higher BMI, and consume more red meat,
while Asians tended to report poorer health and consume more fruit and vegetables. The
Asian group also had a higher incidence of COVID-19 positivity than other racial groups.
The exposure risk for the UKB sample in the context of the nation overall is illustrated
in Figure 1 and Supplemental Figure S3, in which geo-positive tests are shown by Waves
for UKB and UK data separately. Areas with a high number of positive tests in UKB were
generally similar to those in the UK overall.
3.2. Nutritional Factors and COVID-19 Positivity
With adjustment for age, race, and sex (Crude model), consumption of coffee, moder-
ate tea, oily ?sh, and vegetables; and being breastfed as a baby were signi?cantly associated
with lower odds of COVID-19 positivity, while consuming processed meat was associ-
ated with higher odds of COVID-19 positivity (Supplemental Table S4). After further
adjusting for other socio-demographics, medical and lifestyle factors, associations were
attenuated; consumption of tea and ?sh oil were no longer signi?cantly associated with
COVID-19 infection (Model 1–Table 2). The odds (95% CI) of COVID-19 positivity were
0.90 (0.83, 0.98), 0.90 (0.83, 0.96), and 0.92 (0.84, 1.00) when consuming 1 cup, 2–3 cups,
and 4+ cups of coffee/day (vs. <1 cup/day), respectively (Model 2). The odds (95%CI) of
COVID-19 infection was 0.88 (0.80, 0.98) for individuals in the 3rd quartile of vegetable
intake (vs. lowest quartile), 1.14 (1.01, 1.29) for individuals in the 4th quartile of processed
meat intake (vs lowest quartile), and 0.91 (0.85, 0.98) for those who had been breastfed
as a baby (vs. not breastfed). We observed similar associations between these dietary
factors assessed individually (Model 1) or mutually (Model 2) with COVID-19 infection,
suggesting independent associations. Associations were attenuated when further adjusted
for COVID-19 exposure, but patterns of associations remained (Model 3). Further adjusting
for pre-existing compromised pulmonary function, or incident diabetes and heart disease
during follow-up did not alter results (Model 4, data not shown).
Patterns of associations were similar when excluding individuals reporting diabetes,
CVD, or the use of cholesterol-lowering or antihypertension medication from the sample
(data not shown), or when analyzing data for Wave 1 and Wave 2 separately (Supplemental
Table S5). Associations between nutrition factors and COVID-19 positivity were not
signi?cantly modi?ed by age, sex, and race (p > 0.002 for interactions, Supplemental
Tables S6–S8).
In this study, consuming more coffee, vegetables, and being breast fed as well as
consuming less processed meat intake were independently associated with lower odds of
COVID-19 positivity. These associations were attenuated when accounting for the UK’s
COVID-19 case rate (i.e., exposure).
Much research has focused on characterizing individuals who test positive for COVID-
19 and infection progression and outcomes. Individuals with suppressed immune systems,
such as the elderly and those with existing comorbidities including cardiovascular diseases,
hypertension, diabetes, and obesity, are more likely to suffer with progression toward
severe outcomes of COVID-19 [3,4,28,29]. Less attention has focused on modi?able risk
factors preceding COVID-19 infection. While nutrition may theoretically impact COVID-19
susceptibility [3,6,30–32], few investigations have speci?cally tested the hypothesis a priori.
Low vitamin D status is associated with COVID-19 infection, severity, and mortality [33,34].
Del Ser et al. [35] recently explored a variety of risk factors for the incidence, severity, and
mortality of COVID-19 in a Spanish cohort of 913 volunteers aged 75–90 years. Sixty-two
cases reported symptoms compatible with COVID-19; 6 of them died. High alcohol and
lower coffee and tea consumption were associated with disease severity; other dietary
behaviors were not considered.
In the UKB, habitual consumption of 1 or more cups of coffee per day was associated
with about a 10% decrease in risk of COVID-19 compared to less than 1 cup/day. Coffee is
not only a key source of caffeine, but contributes dozens of other constituents; including
many implicated in immunity [21]. Among many populations, coffee is the major contrib-
utor to total polyphenol intake, phenolic acids in particular [36,37]. Coffee, caffeine, and
polyphenols have antioxidant and anti-in?ammatory properties [38–44]. Coffee consump-
tion favorably correlates with in?ammatory biomarkers such as CRP, interleukin-6 (IL-6),
and tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF-?) [38,45–51], which are also associated with COVID-19
severity and mortality [52,53]. Coffee consumption has also been associated with lower
risk of pneumonia in elderly [54]. Taken together, an immunoprotective effect of coffee
against COVID-19 is plausible and merits further investigation.
Fruits and vegetables are rich dietary sources of vitamins, folate, fiber, and several
phytochemicals such as carotenoids and flavonoids [55,56]. These substances have anti-
inflammatory, antibacterial, and antiviral properties andare thusimmune-protective [19,57,58].
In the current study, consumption of at least 0.67 servings/d of vegetables (cooked or raw,
excluding potatoes) was associated with a lower risk of COVID-19 infection. Recent
ecological studies of COVID-19 report that countries with high consumption of foods with
potent antioxidant or anti angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) activity such as raw or
fermented cabbage have a lower COVID-19 death rate compared to other countries [59,60].
Studies of vegetables and fermented-foods with COVID-19 mortality in Europe reported
that each g/day increase in the average national consumption of head cabbage, cucumber or
fermented vegetables decreased the mortality risk for COVID-19 by 11–35%; consumption
of broccoli surprisingly increased COVID-19 mortality [9,10]. COVID-19 mortality was
not our outcome of interest, and while we did not analyze vegetables individually, the
UK’s national consumption of broccoli is above Europe’s average and thus our ?ndings
con?ict with the previous inverse relationship between broccoli consumption and COVID-
19 mortality [9,10]. Fruit (fresh and dried) consumption was not associated with COVID-19
risk in the UKB. While fruits and vegetables share several health bene?ts, the speci?c
bioactive compounds in fruits and in vegetables can vary [61]. Fruits are also relatively
higher in sugar (fructose) while vegetables contain more starch. Follow-up studies to our
current ?ndings might therefore focus on vegetable constituents distinct from those of fruit.
Processed meat consumption of as little as 0.43 servings/d was associated with a
higher risk of COVID-19 in UKB. However red meat consumption presented no risk, sug-
gesting meat per se does not underlie the association we observed with processed meats.
Processed meat refers to any meat that has been transformed through salting, curing,
fermenting, smoking, or other process to enhance ?avor or improve preservation [62]. In
the UK, sausages, bacon, and ham are the major contributors to processed meat intake [63]
and these often contain salt enriched with nitrates/nitrites. Preservatives and other ad-
ditives are increasingly being used yet dif?cult to measure in observational studies [64].
These include milk-, soy- and wheat-based ingredients, spices, ascorbic acid, phosphates,
antioxidants, monosodium glutamate, food colorings, blood plasma, gelatin, and transglu-
taminase [62]. Total and saturated fat concentrations are also relatively higher in processed
meats [65]. Processed meats are also characteristic of a western-style diet, which may
adversely impact immunity [23] and thus other dietary behaviors that correlate with pro-
cessed meat intake may underlie the association we observed with COVID-19 susceptibly.
Consumption of human milk has also emerged as an early-life factor impacting immu-
nity in both infancy and adulthood, with links to lower rates of allergy, in?uenza, asthma,
and other respiratory infections [66,67]. Breastfeeding has also been linked to epigenetic
changes of toll-like-receptors, which play signi?cant roles in innate immunity [68]. We
found a long-term favorable association between being breastfed as a baby and COVID-19
infection in UKB and thus contribute to the growing evidence in support of nutrition early
in life for optimal immunity for life.
The strengths of this study include access to the largest cohort established years before
the COVID-19 pandemic, with detailed health, lifestyle, and nutrition data and ongoing
follow-up. Although much COVID-19 research [69] has incorporated this database, we are
the ?rst to leverage independent COVID-19 surveillance database of the UK to estimate
participant COVID-19 exposure [70]. COVID-19 data from UKB are consistent with public
government data, which adds con?dence to our approach and results.
The study has limitations. First, only a portion of overall UKB participants were tested
for COVID-19 (about 10%) during the study timeframe, and these participants were slightly
older, less educated, and less employed, while reporting poorer health than the original
UKB cohort. Those factors were associated with higher odds of COVID-19 infection in our
analysis sample. We note, however, that the full UKB is not representative of the sampling
population, with evidence of a ‘healthy volunteer’ selection bias [71]. However, participants
in these two samples had many baseline characteristics in common, including dietary
behaviors. Any effects of selection bias would likely lead to an underestimation of the true
associations between nutrition and COVID-19. Second, diet assessment tools are generally
prone to measurement error: limitations inherent to closed-ended options, inaccurate
portion size estimates, and social desirability bias are among the sources contributing to
error [12,72]. Nevertheless, we were uniquely positioned to pursue this investigation with
novel aims and analyses; and although the effect sizes may be imprecise, establishing
a relationship between diet and COVID-19 is informative in itself and can be inferred
from the direction and statistical signi?cance of the association [12,72]. Finally, the current
study is observational and cannot infer causality. While we accounted for a comprehensive
set of potential confounders, we cannot discount the possibility of residual confounding;
whether it be positive or negative. Moreover, we had no concurrent pandemic data on
other established risk factors for COVID-19 infection, such as participant social distancing
behavior, work environment, and face mask-use; some of these factors may correlate with
diet behaviors.
Our results support the hypothesis that nutritional factors may in?uence distinct
aspects of theimmune system, hence susceptibility to COVID-19. Encouraging adherence to
certain nutritional behaviors (e.g., increasing vegetable intake and reducing processed meat
intake) may be an additional tool to existing COVID-19 protection guidelines to limit the
spread of this virus. Nevertheless, our ?ndings warrant con?rmation in other populations.
