Title:
38 Against the Grain / December 2019 - January 2020 

Abstract:

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

The California State University (CSU) system is one of the largest 
public higher education systems in the United States and includes 23 
institutions, largely comprehensive universities, across the state. Within 
this state system, the CSU libraries have been cooperating on collections 
building and have shared technology services through the Chancellor’s 
Office (CO). In June 2015, the contract was signed for CSU libraries 
and the CO’s libraries supporting the division to migrate to Ex Libris’ 
(ULMS), where some of the principles in moving toward a shared inte-
grated library system (ILS) and discovery environment were to increase 
collaboration and share cost savings.
The CSU libraries went live with Alma and Primo in the summer 
of 2017. For those working in technical services, the possibilities to 
centrally manage consortially licensed resources as well as share bib-
liographic records in Alma’s Network Zone (NZ) at the consortial layer 
meant new opportunities to collaborate across the libraries and new ways 
to re-think workflows. The migration and subsequent implementation 
of an unfamiliar ILS intimated that it was going to be necessary to come 
up with consortial policies and best practices within the CSU libraries, 
but also required close partnerships with vendors to establish workflows 
and integrate systems to gain efficiencies. The special issue on “Vendor 
Library Partnerships” in Against the Grain highlights the importance of 
this symbiotic relationship and stresses the common “vision” vendors 
and libraries share to “provide access to the world’s information in or-
der to create new knowledge.”1 The CSU consortial migration proved 
that collaboration within the consortium as well as with vendors is a 
necessary requirement to execute this vision. 
a territory system where Library Technical Services (LTS) representa-
tives work with libraries on various technical service projects such as 
migrations, opening day collections, workflow automation, shelf-ready 
services, and any needed training sessions to support service set-ups. 
Having one individual working throughout the region on all institutional 
projects helps provide best practice information to current customers 
and allows for multi-campus projects to have a common representative 
working with individual institutions on a variety of levels for consortial 
integration.
As different vendors offer different degrees of support and feed-
back mechanisms to understand a library’s individual structure, hav-
ing a regionally appointed representative with the understanding of 
multiple libraries can lead to better understanding of library technical 
service trends, best practices, and needs. For example, although most 
libraries have unique set-ups, there will often be other institutions 
with similar needs, and vendors can be a source of information to 
other library contacts for best practices, or new ideas. A customer 
who has completed implementation and has been using a service for 
some time may have advice for libraries looking to set-up a similar 
service. A regionally placed vendor representative willing to assist 
with cross library communication can, with permission, provide 
contact details or responses to the libraries that are working on 
service implementations.
Libraries and vendors collaborate on technical services automa-
tion and migration projects. CSU Fullerton, as part of the larger 
ULMS consortial migration, worked closely with the regional GOBI 
LTS to implement a workflow that avoided duplicating record fees in 
the new environment where bibliographic records are shared consor-
tially. System migration projects are time and labor intensive, and, 
depending on the scale of the project, setting-up the vendor profiles 
and system testing can take months to coordinate. It is critical to 
get in contact with vendor representatives well in advance of the 
migration in order to have a smooth transition, discuss timelines, 
and form best practices. It is also equally important to maintain 
those communication channels during and after the migration to 
troubleshoot any issues as they arise.
Locally at Fullerton, there was very little integration connecting the 
former ILS, Millennium, to other vendor systems, nor to the CSU-wide 
financial system, PeopleSoft, in the acquisitions work area prior to the 
migration. Thus, there was a lot of duplicative work being done to align 
acquisitions information in various systems in the form of data entry. 
The migration was viewed and utilized as an opportunity to update 
legacy practices and take advantage of the functionalities offered in a 
new ILS to streamline both local and consortial acquisitions workflows. 
GOBI is the main vendor supplying materials in the English language 
or published in predominantly English-speaking countries to Fullerton. 
GOBI supplies one-time and standing order titles to Fullerton via the 
approval plan, firm orders, DDA, and ongoing standing orders. Ful-
lerton uses GOBI’s shelf-ready services and works with OCLC to get 
full bibliographic records for the approval and firm order titles ordered 
through GOBI. Most of the GOBI orders supported local collections 
building efforts. For the purposes of this discussion, the focus will be 
on optimizing the use of the LTS and the available GOBI options to 
establish a firm ordering workflow.
GOBI customers with Alma as their ILS have three available firm 
order workflow options to choose from. During the migration process, 
a library would work with a GOBI LTS representative to learn more 
about the available workflow options, select a workflow, and have the 
workflow implemented in their Alma environment. This process can 
take several months depending on the length of time the library needs to 
select a workflow and the complexities of a library’s account structure 
within GOBI. The three available firm order workflow options are 
GobiAPI, GobiExport, and Electronic Order Confirmation Records 
(EOCR). It is important to note that each workflow option is part of 
GOBI’s library technical services, and both the GobiExport and the 
EOCR workflows have “Plus” and “Basic” versions. The GobiAPI 
currently has only one version most analogous to the “Basic” version 
in terms of the bibliographic data provided. For the sake of simplicity, 
this article will focus solely on the “Basic” level workflows for Alma 
libraries.2 All the bibliographic information in the “Basic” level records 
for all three firm ordering options are capitalized and are easy to visually 
identify in the system.
The GobiAPI firm ordering entails the library placing an order 
directly in GOBI and through the API set-up, a brief bibliographic 
record that includes order details is provided to a library’s Alma sys-
tem (Institution Zone (IZ) vs. NZ is based on a library’s Alma system 
settings). Through the transfer of information, GOBI obtains Alma’s 
purchase order line (POL) number for each title in an order, allowing 
for the POL to be a match point for any downstream services such 
as cataloging or Electronic Data Interchange For Administration, 
Commerce and Transport (EDIFACT) invoicing. With the API, the 
library does not need to connect to GOBI’s FTP server to obtain the 
brief bibliographic records. Of note, the brief records are not MARC 
formatted nor are they available for easy access to the library as the 
API is a traditional mechanism to automatically feed metadata into 
a library’s Alma system. Specifically, the API build specifies what 
GOBI information is placed in each corresponding section of Alma. 
The resulting file is a X12 file generated for the server to read. These 
files are only accessible by a developer on the GOBI server. Files with 
errors generate an error report by Alma and an error report is sent to 
GOBI.3 Upon receiving an error report, GOBI representatives reach 
out to the library to help resolve the errors.
The GobiExport firm ordering workflow4 operates as follows: the 
library places titles into an “export” cart online in GOBI’s interface 
and batch exports MARC files with bibliographic information and the 
GOBI’s FTP site. The export files are usually available within five min-
utes of initiating the export and the library would then load the files into 
Alma using an import profile that loads the EOD files, generating POLs 
for individual titles and item records for print materials. The import 
profile(s) would set needed default values and/or map pertinent values 
to the local data indices, and either immediately or on a scheduled job, 
the library’s ILS would “package” the POLs and send back EDIFACT 
orders to GOBI on specified subaccounts. The packaged orders would 
contain various information from the export records and Alma about 
each ordered title.
The EOCR firm order method involves: the library placing orders 
directly in GOBI and a brief bibliographic record is provided to the 
library through FTP the next business day after a library places the order. 
The library then uses an EOD load in Alma to pull in the brief records 
from GOBI’s FTP server. The EOCR records are MARC formatted 
records that have the bibliographic information and contain the order 
detail information the library provided at point of order. The EOCR 
workflow uses the vendor order number also known as the GOBI order 
key as a match point for downstream services. 
The ULMS migration at Fullerton necessitated a thorough under-
standing of all the available options with the help of the GOBI LTS. 
Each one of these workflows have different set-ups with GOBI and 
Alma, allowing for institutions with very different needs to have a variety 
of options to choose from. But each chosen workflow has implications 
on subsequent workflows, especially because acquisitions is one of 
the first steps whereby records get created and/or loaded into the ILS.
service but this workflow required an added order acknowledgement 
data transmission process in a Millennium environment. Therefore, 
the EOCR service for Alma was quite different. During the migration 
planning stages, Fullerton opted to utilize the GobiExport service 
with the recognition that the bibliographic records will be shared at the 
consortial level and governed under the consortial bibliographic man-
agement policies5 as well as begin the EDIFACT electronic invoicing 
to improve the invoicing workflow. Neither of these two services were 
previously implemented at Fullerton.
Within the CSU libraries, there is a varied landscape on the GOBI 
ordering workflows across individual campuses and there were a few 
institutions that went live directly with the GobiAPI service in the sum-
mer of 2017, which aligned with the CSU consortial Alma go-live date. 
Fullerton opted for a more conservative approach for establishing firm 
ordering procedures. After reviewing all the options, in consultation 
with the GOBI LTS and other colleagues utilizing Alma and GOBI, 
Fullerton implemented the GobiExport option in order to have more 
direct control over the timing of when the brief order files will be ready, 
better manage the orders before they are sent out from the system, and 
still be able to batch ingest records by exporting EOD bibliographic 
files from GOBI and loading them into Alma.
All Alma users will have an IZ and have access to the Community 
Zone (CZ). Local information, records, and inventory will live in 
the IZ while the CZ is a knowledge base for electronic resources, can 
serve as a catalog, and stores community authority records. Consortial 
Alma users will have the added benefit of utilizing the NZ, which hosts 
shared bibliographic records and facilitates the central management of 
consortially licensed electronic resources. The CSUs initially populated 
the NZ based on gathering the attached holdings information of every 
CSU library in OCLC. There is currently a daily OCLC feed that con-
tinuously refreshes the NZ with any adds, updates, and deletes of CSU 
libraries holdings in OCLC to maintain currency of bibliographic data.
In this shared bibliographic space comprised of universities with 
similar missions and somewhat overlapping purchasing patterns based 
on the collections review in GreenGlass, the Acquisitions Librarian prior 
to the migration envisioned scenarios where two or more institutions 
would initiate orders for the exact same resource that would utilize the 
same bibliographic record in the NZ. The consortial migration already 
necessitated a close communication with the GOBI LTS since the 
majority of Fullerton’s firm order purchases were transacted through 
GOBI, but Fullerton also wanted to put in place a workflow whereby 
it would be possible to avoid purchasing the same bibliographic record 
that others have already purchased within the consortium.
The main CSU system’s funding comes from the public; more than 
half of CSU’s revenue is from the state of California through its taxpayer 
contributions and a major portion of the remaining funding is through the 
collection of tuition fees. The distribution of state funds initially trickles 
out through the CO, which then filters to the individual campuses, and 
continues to subdivide to the various colleges and administrative units. 
It is the responsibility of acquisitions professionals to “strive to ensure 
good stewardship and maximum value of the institution’s resources” 
according to ALA ALCTS’s “Statement on Principles and Standards of 
Acquisitions Practice.” 6 Since most of the CSU libraries’ collections 
and/or operations budgets ultimately come from the same source, as 
a steward of public funds, the original thought process behind imple-
menting GobiExport at Fullerton was to design an ethically-minded 
financial workflow where public funds were not expended for the exact 
same product more than once, if possible.
Fullerton contracts with OCLC’s WorldShare Collection Manager 
(WCM) service through GOBI for full bibliographic records of titles 
purchased via GOBI’s approval and firm orders. It is possible to create 
bypass subaccounts with GOBI for firm orders so that resources pur-
chased under this type of an account would not result in an automatic 
purchase of a full bibliographic record.7 Purchases made under the 
bypass subaccounts would however also result in no physical processing, 
so Fullerton essentially forfeited shelf-ready services for a portion of 
their firm orders in favor of attempting to ethically steward public funds.
In addition to the GobiExport firm ordering workflow outlined in 
the previous section, at a more granular level, Fullerton’s acquisitions 
record import workflow includes the manual review of bibliographic re-
cords if there is a match in the NZ. Alma has matching 
algorithms built into the import profiles predominantly 
based on bibliographic records matching on MARC 
fields 02X and 035. When the GobiExport files with 
EOD bibliographic records are loaded, if there are no 
matches in the system, then the EOD bibliographic 
records would load to the NZ and create the POLs 
and item records in the IZ. But if the loads included 
matches, an acquisitions staff would utilize the full bib-
liographic record already in the NZ and flip the subaccount to a bypass 
subaccount in the POL, which would avoid triggering a purchase of a 
full bibliographic record through WCM.
Fullerton’s fiscal year runs from July 1st to June 30th and, over the 
span of the two fiscal years 2017/2018 and 2018/2019, there was a total 
of 2,537 firm orders placed with GOBI, 624 electronic and 1,913 print. 
Out of the 2,537 GOBI firm orders, 600 firm orders total were placed 
on bypass subaccounts, 16 electronic and 584 print, meaning nearly 
25% of firm orders were ordered without full bibliographic records 
or shelf-ready physical processing in two fiscal years. This process 
allowed for the customer to select and use certain subaccounts for 
different purposes, ultimately putting the control on technical services 
outsourcing usage on the library.
Having a single vendor representative that was knowledgeable 
about workflows across the entire consortium was helpful in getting 
a sense of the diversity of workflows. From the financial perspective, 
there were cost savings as Fullerton avoided purchasing bibliographic 
records that had already been purchased by another member of the 
consortium. There was also an informal assessment of the cost to 
physically process the materials in-house with student labor. At optimal 
production with varying degrees of complexity in physically processing 
where the students were paid at minimum $12.00 per hour in 2019, it 
took the students one to three minutes to apply security device, apply 
two stamp impressions, apply barcode, scan barcode into the ILS, then 
generate and apply the spine label. Having in-house physical processing 
of materials was significantly cheaper than outsourcing that activity 
to a vendor. The physical processing factor obviously does not apply 
to electronic materials but Fullerton is an e-preferred campus so the 
benefits derived from using existing bibliographic records in the NZ 
for e-books might be better realized in the future as there are increased 
purchases of e-formats on the bypass subaccounts.8 From an ethically 
principled stance, if funds were allocated to state institutions in a 
The GobiExport and EDIFACT ordering workflow provides CSU 
Fullerton with more complete control over the ordering workflow by 
allowing for brief bibliographic records to be uploaded to the ILS be-
fore orders for resources are placed. This amount of micro-managing 
of orders can be a successful cost savings option for libraries wanting 
a mixture of outsourced shelf-ready services with the flexibility to 
completely bypass outsourcing. Fullerton’s GobiExport service along 
with the GOBI firm orders import profiles set-up by the Acquisitions 
Librarian ensured that in situations where there is already an acceptable 
full bibliographic record in the NZ that adhered to local cataloging stan-
dards, the records were utilized. From a purely financial perspective, 
the quotes for the EOCR and GobiExport services at the “Basic” level 
were comparable while the GobiAPI service was quoted at a higher rate 
than the other two, even with the CSU consortial deal for the GobiAPI. 
Furthermore, the implementation of GobiExport cut down the lag time 
in loading the EOD records from one day to immediately when switch-
ing from the EOCR service to GobiExport, significantly improving the 
discoverability of newly purchased items right away.
GobiExport and EDIFACT ordering workflow is more time and labor 
intensive for the library because it requires more steps to order a title 
than GobiAPI and it does not fully utilize the automation technology 
Alma and GOBI are capable of. Although nearly 25% of firm orders 
were ordered on bypass accounts over the span of two fiscal years, the 
WCM fees charged were modest and the workflow was 
not the most efficient way to acquire materials using Alma. 
The ordering work at Fullerton is done by Library Services 
Specialist IIIs, who typically “perform more complex or spe-
cialized [...] library duties to support daily library operations 
and/or programs,” 9 and therefore are compensated for their 
labor at a rate higher than entry level employees. Due to the 
layered workflow for GOBI firm ordering, it required staff 
with more experience to handle the work but could introduce 
more human errors. The ordering workflow could be optimized if the 
ethical stance could be overlooked, especially since specialized labor 
costs far outpace the cost savings from purchasing bibliographic records.
This is one of the many conversations taking place across libraries, 
vendors, and consortia. More work needs to be done to fully understand 
the optimized or non-optimal workflow trade-offs and re-imagine how it 
could be enhanced in the future. Having a 360 conversation with vendors 
and librarians working at various ends of consortial work is one way to 
start the assessment. Through a close partnership with the GOBI LTS 
representative, Fullerton was able to implement a system that bypassed 
duplicate purchasing of bibliographic records. But for those interested 
in simulating a similar workflow, it would be recommended to look at 
the costs and efficiencies as they pertain to the cost of services, cost 
for labor, cost savings, steps involved, and the time it takes to perform 
the full GobiExport firm ordering cycle, while balancing the ethical 
conundrum of managing public funds. It would also be interesting to 
find a more efficient solution that could scale consortially.
The overall workflow resulted in a GobiExport option at Fullerton 
that allowed the flexibility to utilize the bypass subaccount structures 
whereas consortially some sister campuses preferred the GobiAPI. 
Through close partnership with GOBI’s LTS representative, the 
project to update institutional technical specifications had a common 
representative working with individual institutions on a variety of 
levels for consortial integration and for Fullerton to be able to enact 
a system that bypassed duplicate purchasing of bibliographic records, 
which was the desired outcome. Although it is not yet certain if the 
benefits fully outweigh the downsides, the migration not only resulted 
in consortial collaboration across the libraries and the CO employees 
but formed a close alliance with vendors to flesh out the workflows 
behind the scenes and re-visit existing infrastructures with a new lens 
framed by the ILS. 
as necessary. Create a space for employees to voice their concerns. 
This can be done via group meetings, regular one on one check-ins, 
or in casual conversation. Also, when implementing a new policy 
or procedure, follow up with your staff to see if the new procedure 
is working well. Document your steps and progress along the way. 
Sometimes the smallest changes can have a much bigger meaning to 
staff than to managers. 
Staff: Ask questions and provide feedback. Not everything that 
you suggest to your manager may be acted upon immediately, but it 
may spark ideas for long-term or other improvements. Be willing to 
give a new workflow or procedure a try to see how it goes. Also, be 
patient with your managers as they test out new workflows and look 
for ways to make improvements.
in our workflow. We made a conscious effort over the last two years 
to reframe our relationship with outsourcing so that we may provide 
better customer service and so that our staff feel less vulnerable and 
more confident of the value they bring to the system. The additional 
services we have been able to offer in cataloging and processing allow 
us to highlight in-house talent and skills. Outsourcing felt like a threat 
for many years, but now it is a tool to facilitate quick delivery of 
customized cataloged and processed materials — we can allow vendors 
to handle highly repetitive tasks so we can turn our attention to in-depth 
customizations, services, and projects that benefit our local community.
1. Hahn, Joel. OML for the complete beginner. http://www.
http://computerwhizzard.50megs.com/OCLCconnexioncli-
entmacros.html
5. WaltsMacros. https://github.com/wnickeson/WaltsMacros 
publishers and their interactees, primarily on matters relating to digital 
change or the supply chain. I enjoy reading his blog which I don’t do 
enough! Check out one of the latest — 2020: Zero year thoughts 
blog/.
Audible has finally settled the lawsuit over its speech-to-text feature, 
Captions. In July, Audible announced Captions, claiming it will be 
geared toward students as an educational text accompaniment to its 
audiobooks. Publishers were immediately up in arms, declaring it a 
copyright issue, arguing that Audible only had licenses for audio-use, 
not text. While Audible insisted that its service was not a replacement 
for eBooks, publishers took the issue to court, where it has been stew-
ing since August. The Guardian reports that “the parties had resolved 
their disputes and expected to submit the settlement documents by 21 
January.”
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2020/jan/15/audible-settles-copy-
right-lawsuit-publishers-captions
Speaking of Audible, I have been riveted by listening to The House 
of Morgan: An American Banking Dynasty and the Rise of Modern Fi-
nance by Ron Chernow. This is from Amazon and is very accurate in 
my opinion: “Published to critical acclaim twenty years ago, and now 
considered a classic, The House of Morgan is the most ambitious history 
ever written about American finance. It is a rich, panoramic story of 
