Title:
Moisture assisted perovskite film growth for
high performance solar cells

Abstract:

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

Perovskite type semiconductors, due to their excellent
absorption and charge transport, have attracted a signi?cant
amount of attention in recent years.1,2 Miyasaka et al. dem-
onstrated the ?rst lead halide perovskite photovoltaic device
as the light absorber in a dye-sensitized solar cell, yielding a
power conversion ef?ciency (PCE) of 4%.2 However, it was
later realized that the liquid electrolyte hole transport mate-
rial resulted in degradation of the perovskite layer.2,3 Further
progress was made within a few years by employing meso-
porous nanostructure that boosted the PCE well above
10%.4–9 These results suggest an enormous potential for per-
ovskite compounds as ef?cient photoactive materials for
photovoltaic applications.10–17
Lead halide perovskite ?lms can be deposited onto the
substrates through in situ reactions of precursors via single- or
two-step methods.2–28 Initially, mesoporous metal oxides, ei-
ther semi-conductive or insulating, were used to form continu-
ous high-quality perovskite ?lms in photovoltaic devices.3–9
To simplify the device architecture and processing procedures,
planar architectures without mesoporous layers have been pro-
posed.18–20 In the meantime, photo-physical studies have
shown that perovskite materials exhibit several tens of nano-
seconds in carrier lifetimes and a few hundred nanometers in
diffusion lengths, justifying the use of planar hetero-junc-
tions.21,22 Intriguingly, perovskite materials demonstrate bipo-
lar transport properties20 and can be readily incorporated into
p-i-n device architectures where they serve as the intrinsic
absorption layer. Recent works demonstrated that solution and
vacuum co-evaporation processing techniques delivered PCEs
of 12%19,23–27 and 12%–15%20,28 in planar designs, respec-
tively. Although the growth dynamics of perovskite ?lms are
far less understood at present, the simplicity of one-step solu-
tion processing techniques makes them preferable to two-step
methods. It is critical to gain a deep insight into ?lm growth
mechanisms to enable use of facile one-step processing meth-
ods that can produce high-quality perovskite ?lms. Previous
reports show that full coverage of the perovskite ?lm on
the substrate surface is necessary to ensure suf?cient shunt
resistance. Coverage can be improved by annealing the ?lm to
fuse separate crystals into one and also by increasing ?lm
thickness.19 Similar processes are essential to reduce structural
defects and electronic traps within thin ?lm solar cells.
Unfortunately, perovskites cannot withstand temperatures
above 110 C, at which they are susceptible to decomposition
or de-wetting.19 Film thickness is also limited by the charge
diffusion length as indicated by the deterioration of photovol-
taic performance for thicker layers. In order to address these
challenges, we must develop effective approaches for control-
ling the crystal growth using facile and controllable deposition
conditions.29–31
In this letter, we report moisture assisted grain growth
of solution processed perovskite ?lms. As an approach to
achieve high-quality perovskite ?lms, we anneal the precur-
sor ?lm in a humid environment (ambient air) to dramati-
cally increase grain size, carrier mobility, and charge
carrier lifetime, thus improving electrical and optical prop-
erties and enhancing photovoltaic performance. We demon-
strate perovskite solar cells with 17.1% PCE and a ?ll
factor (FF) of 80%.
The details of device fabrication can be found in our
previous publication.24 Speci?cally, the mixture solution of
1:3 ratio of PbCl2:CH3NH3I in N,N-dimethylformamide
(DMF) solvent (0.8M) was spin coated onto the poly(3,4-eth-
ylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)
layer at 1500rpm. The precursor ?lm are annealing at 90C
for 2 h in nitrogen glove box or dry oxygen glove box or am-
bient air (humidity of 35%65%). To study the effect of
moisture level on the morphology and devices’ performance,
the samples are placed into the humid controllable chamber
for annealing. After annealing, the perovskite ?lms were
transferred into nitrogen glove box. A 2% phenyl-C61-bu-
tyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) in chlorobenzene solution
was coated onto the perovskite layer at 1000 rpm. After that,
0.02% polyelectrolyte poly[(9,9-bis(30-(N,N-dimethylamino)
propyl)-2,7-?uorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctyl?uorene)] (PFN) in
methanol was spin-coated on PCBM at 2000 rpm. Finally,
the device was transferred to vacuum chamber for Al elec-
trode evaporation. The devices’ area is 0.1 cm2. The X-ray
diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on a PANalytical
X’Pert Pro X-ray powder diffractometer using Cu-Ka radia-
tion (k¼ 1.54050 A?). The scanning electron microscope
(SEM) images were taken on a Jeooel JSM-6700F. Steady-
state photoluminescence (PL) was measured by Horiba
Jobinyvon system with an excitation at 600nm. External
quantum ef?ciencies (EQE) were measured by an Enli
Technology (Taiwan) EQE measurement system.
The SEM images of the perovskite ?lms fabricated via
the thermal annealing method (90 C, 2 h in nitrogen glove
box, O2 and H2O level lower than 5 ppm) are shown in Figs.
1(a) and 1(b). The pristine ?lm exhibits a grain size of
100–300nm with apparent pin holes and grain boundaries.
These defects introduce strong energetic disorder, which
impedes the charge transport, induces recombination, and low-
ers photovoltaic performance.19 Signi?cant improvement in
?lm morphology results when perovskite precursor ?lms are
annealed in ambient air (humidity of 35%65%). Perovskite
?lms annealed in ambient air are shown in Figs. 1(c) and 1(d),
respectively. Notably, individual crystal sizes have been
increased, pin-holes have been signi?cantly reduced, and grain
sizes increased beyond 500nm. On the other hand, when
annealing the perovskite precursor ?lm in a dry oxygen envi-
ronment (Figs. 1(e) and 1(f)), the ?lm morphology is similar
as in the case of the nitrogen environment, indicating the sig-
ni?cant role of moisture on the ?nal ?lm morphology. The
cross-section SEM showed that the crystal change across the
entire of perovskite ?lm (Fig. S1, in Ref. 32). XRD results
con?rm the improved crystallinity of the perovskite ?lms (Fig.
S2, in Ref. 32), as the diffraction peaks of ?lms annealed in a
humid environment are stronger and sharper than those
annealed in a dry nitrogen environment.
To further con?rm our hypothesis, the perovskite precur-
sor ?lms were annealed in a humid nitrogen chamber.
Similarly, large crystals and fewer pin-holes are seen than that
of the dry nitrogen environment (Fig. S3, in Ref. 32). This
result directly con?rmed that the moisture introduction is
helpful for perovskite ?lm growth. Furthermore, we system-
atically studied the effect of moisture level (20%–80% humid-
ity) on the perovskite ?lm formation (Fig. S4, in Ref. 32).
Despite the contributions of humidity in constructing larger
crystal sizes, XRD results show a small amount of PbI2
phase present in crystals after annealing above 80% humidity.
This may be an indication that the CH3NH3PbI3 decomposes
under high humidity levels (Fig. S5, in Ref. 32). We can con-
clude that while moisture is bene?cial for high quality perov-
skite ?lm growth, the relative amount should be carefully
controlled.
Moisture-assisted crystal growth has previously been
seen in various crystal systems, inducing grain boundary
creep as a result of the absorption of moisture within the
grain boundaries.33–35 Due to the strong hydroscopic nature
of CH3NH3I,36 exposing perovskite precursor to moisture
during ?lm formation could results in accumulation of mois-
ture within grain boundaries, inducing grain boundary creep
and subsequently merging adjacent grains together. This
effectively increases grain size and reduces pinhole forma-
tion. In addition to grain boundary movement, moisture
could also provide an aqueous environment to enhance the
diffusion length of the precursor ions, further promoting per-
ovskite grain growth. The recrystallization process via mois-
ture annealing give rise to a high quality perovskite ?lm, a
proposed scheme for enhanced crystallinity of perovskite ?lm
in moisture environment is shown in Fig. S6 (in Ref. 32). The
accurate of moisture-assisted perovskite growth is not clear
and still under study.
Figure 2(a) shows steady-state PL measurement for pre-
cursor ?lms annealed under varying atmospheric conditions,
such as nitrogen, oxygen, and ambient air (humidity:
35% 6 5%), the PL results are shown in Fig. 2(a). The perov-
skite ?lm was deposited via spin-coating onto a layer of
PEDOT:PSS to emulate real p-i-n device processing condi-
tions. The enhanced PL indicates that the non-radiative
decay is signi?cantly suppressed through our annealing
method. Furthermore, time-resolved PL (TRPL) (Fig. 2(b))
clearly shows that PL lifetime improves with annealing in
ambient air. Annealing in a dry nitrogen and oxygen envi-
ronment gave lifetimes of approximately 33 ns, whereas the
humidity-controlled annealing increased the lifetime to
91ns. Here, the PL and the TRPL measurements show that
the non-radiative recombination channels are greatly inhib-
ited, and therefore the number of defects reduced, by anneal-
ing the precursor ?lm in a humid environment.
Using our annealing method, we constructed devices con-
sisting of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3xClx/PCBM/
PFN/Al as shown in Fig. 3(a), where PEDOT:PSS and PCBM
are the hole and electron transport layers, respectively. We
incorporated a layer of PFN to form an Ohmic contact to assist
in electron extraction from the PCBM to Al.37 This resulted in
improved device performance, especially in FF (Fig. S7, in
Ref. 32). The J-V characteristics of the devices based on per-
ovskite ?lms annealed in different environment are shown in
Fig. 3(b). When the precursor ?lm is annealed in dry environ-
ment, the device performance showed approximately 12%
PCE. In comparison, we can see that when annealing precur-
sor ?lm in ambient air, the PCE is increased from 12.3% to
15.4%, the VOC from 0.86 V to 0.99V and FF from 75% to
78%, while the short circuit current (JSC) maintained at
19mA/cm2. The best performance achieved through our
annealing process was 17.1% PCE (Fig. 3(c)). The perform-
ance of the devices is summarized in Table I. External quan-
tum ef?ciency (EQE) of the device is shown in Fig. 3(d). The
integrated JSC is 19.2mA/cm2, which is consistent with J-V
measurement but for a small difference resulting from encap-
sulation degradation. Most notably, our method is robust and
our results highly consistent and reproducible, which is unam-
biguously ascribed to the moisture effects during annealing
(Fig. S8, in Ref. 32). Device performance of varying humidity
levels are shown in Fig. S9 and Table S1 (in Ref. 32), depict-
ing that moisture levels lower than 60% result in signi?cant
enhancements. Slight degradation occurs at humidity levels
greater than 80%, particularly reducing the FF, which could
be due to the presence of an inherent PbI2 phase.
The improved VOC and FF strongly indicate a reduction
in recombination loss as a result of our annealing method.
For further con?rmation, the I-V characteristics of the devi-
ces treated under different conditions were analyzed. Planar
structured perovskite solar cells can be treated as a single
junction diode. For a device with a large shunt resistance
(>3000 Xcm2, the shunt resistance of the pristine and mois-
ture treated devices both exceed 3000Xcm2),38,39 the I-V
characteristics are described by
where J is the current ?ow through the external load, JSC is
the light induced current, J0 is the dark saturate current den-
sity, V is the applied voltage, A is the ideality factor, KB is
the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and e is the
electron charge. Based on Eq. (1), the VOC is obtained when
the current ?owing through the external circuit is zero
(2)
It can be seen through Eq. (2) that a higher VOC corresponds
to a lower J0. Equation (1) can also be written as38,39
(3)
J0 can be obtained by ?tting the curve of ln(JSCJ) vs
(Vþ RSJ), where the Rs is obtained by ?tting the curve of
dV/dJ vs (JSCJ)1. The J-V curves shown in Figure 3(b)
were used for analysis. The plots of dV/dJ vs (JSCJ)1
and ln(JSCJ) vs (V þ RSJ) are shown in Figures 4(a) and
4(b), respectively. Linear plot ?tting of Figure 4(a) shows
that the perovskite ?lms annealed in nitrogen and ambient
air exhibit similar series resistances (1 Xcm2). The series
resistances of nitrogen and ambient air annealed samples
show 0.9 and 1.4 Xcm2, respectively; while the ideality fac-
tor calculated is close to 2.3 for the two devices. Similarly,
by linearly ?tting the ln(JSCJ) vs (Vþ RSJ), the ideality
factor are 2.3 for the ?lms annealing in nitrogen and ambient
air. The ideality factors obtained by the two methods are
consistent. J0 for the pristine and air ambient devices are
1.4 105 and 8.1 107mA/cm2, respectively. The J0
from air annealed samples is 2 orders of magnitude
lower than that of the pristine samples. J0 is a well-
understood parameter indicating the thermal emission rate of
electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, and
is directly related to the recombination rate. The smaller J0
of the air exposed sample indicates a lower recombination
loss, and accordingly a higher VOC consistent with the meas-
ured high FF.
Finally, it must be noted that our devices showed no
obvious I-V hysteresis, this is much different behavior from
conventional planar structure devices based on TiO2 trans-
port layer,40 the details can be found in supplementary mate-
rial (Fig. S10, in Ref. 32).
In conclusion, we reveal that mild moisture has a posi-
tive effect on perovskite ?lm formation, demonstrating per-
ovskite solar cells with 17.1% power conversion ef?ciencies,
?ll factors over 80%, and the elimination of hysteresis
effects. The moisture induced perovskite grain growth
method is not limited to solar cell application but applicable
to other electronic devices, such as light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), lasers, transistors and sensors.
