Title:
Neurologic music therapy in multidisciplinary
acute stroke rehabilitation: Could it be feasible
and helpful?

Abstract:
Background: There is increasing evidence for music-based interventions in neurorehabilitation,
improving mood and functional outcomes. In response, there is growing interest from health-care
providers in setting up Neurologic Music Therapy (NMT) services. This paper presents some
preliminary data on the feasibility and acceptability of NMT in the acute stroke, multidisciplinary
team setting, about which little is known.
Objectives: To assess the feasibility and acceptability of a two-day per-week NMT service over
24 months.
Methods: Data were collected on the number of referrals received, sessions attended, sessions
declined and reasons why. Staff completed questionnaires, and collected them from patients and
their relatives, rating interventions: 1. Not helpful, 2. Quite helpful, 3. Helpful, 4. Very helpful.
Patients completed the Visual Analogue Mood Scale (VAMS) pre-/post- a single session.
Results: Of 201 patients referred, 177 received treatment and 675 sessions were delivered.
Twenty-four patients were discharged before sessions were scheduled and 28 sessions were
declined, predominantly due to fatigue. Mean scores (SD) from questionnaire data were: patients
(n = 99) 3.34 (0.825), relatives (n = 13) 3.83 (0.372), staff (n = 27) 3.85 (0.388). Mean, post-session
VAMS data (n = 52) showed a non-significant reduction in ‘Sad’ (7.5, p = .007, CI = 2.1, 12.9) and an
increase in ‘Happy’ (+ 6.2, p = .013, CI = ?11.0, ?1.4).
Conclusions: Data suggest the service was feasible and helpful, particularly for patient mood,
possibly improving engagement in rehabilitation. Research to determine generalizability in different
stroke environments and treatment effects within them is warranted.

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

Music-based interventions, including those from
monly part of acute stroke rehabilitation and little is
known about feasibility and acceptability of delivery
within these specialist teams and environments.
The value of music therapy within multidisci-
plinary teams, and potential benefits for patients
in neurorehabilitation have been discussed and
evaluated in relation to published research.2–8
Benefits for stroke inpatients at the acute stage
have been reported for arm function,9 non-fluent
aphasia,10 gait,11 and cognition.12 There may also
be benefits for mood and social interactions.12–15
This could make an important contribution to
engagement in rehabilitation, as depression is pre-
valent amongst inpatients,16 particularly those
with aphasia, and is associated with worse rehabi-
litation outcomes.17 Some music-based exercises,
such as those for finger dexterity using keyboards,9
may be transferrable onto tablet-based apps, offer-
ing portability for bedside and home-based treat-
ment delivery.18 19 With further development and
evaluation along the guidelines being developed
for the growing mHealth (the use of smart phones,
iPads, and wearables in healthcare) industry,20
such technology might offer further patient bene-
fit. Music-based exercises bring massed practice,
auditory and tactile feedback promoting neural
reorganization,21–23 and can exploit the temporal
frameworks to support the priming and timing of
movements.24
There may be added value for multidisciplinary
neurorehabilitation and patient benefit, through
the inclusion of NMT as part of standard care.
The psychological effects and neural mechanisms
of interventions probably share neural networks
for reward, arousal, affect regulation, learning
and activity-driven plasticity6, which might lead
to enhanced rehabilitation outcomes and quality
of life for patients. There may also be benefits in
motivation and fatigue reduction.25–27
This two-year, two-day per-week NMT feasibility
project focused on providing clinical contacts for
a single cohort (no control group) of in-patients on
a 26-bed stroke and rehabilitation unit and four
additional beds allocated for neurorehabilitation on
the nearby acute major trauma ward. There was no
control group, as the purpose of the project was to
determine whether or not it would be feasible to
deliver NMT interventions to acute stroke patients,
which have never been part of multidisciplinary
stroke rehabilitation in this setting. Furthermore,
the acceptability of these exercises also needed to
be determined in terms of whether multidisciplinary
team members would refer patients, and whether
patients, their relatives, and the ward staff regarded
the interventions as potentially useful for stroke
rehabilitation. The wards were situated within
a large hospital and center for medical research.
Interventions were delivered as part of usual care;
therefore, the project did not undergo ethical review.
The project was registered with the hospital audit-
ing department, who approved all data collection and
patient information materials. The project was
approved by the neurosciences divisional lead and
senior management, and funded by the hospital’s
charitable trust.
Patients were referred in team meetings, by e-mail,
and on the wards by members of the multidisci-
plinary team, ward staff and by self-referral. Any
patient on the stroke ward or on the major trauma
ward who was receiving neurorehabilitation could
be referred. Sessions were delivered in a speech
therapy treatment room, ward dining area, corri-
dor, and gym. Session notes for each patient were
entered into the hospital’s electronic patient data-
base by the Neurologic Music Therapist (NMT)
(author). He also recorded data into an Excel
spreadsheet on the number of referrals made and
by which discipline, number of patients seen, the
number of individual and group clinical contacts,
and sessions declined with reasons why. Active
engagement in exercises by patients was not timed.
Three questionnaires were designed for the evalua-
tion, to be completed by patients, their relatives and
staff, which were not collected in-person by the NMT,
but other staff who were available. These provided
opportunity for written feedback and ratings on how
helpful NMT was thought to be and in which areas:
1. Not helpful, 2. Quite helpful, 3. Helpful, 4. Very
helpful. Thematic analysis of questionnaire feedback
was conducted by the NMT. Data on patient mood
before and after a single session (usually the first) were
collected using the Visual Analogue Mood Scale
(VAMS)28 by the NMT and other staff on the ward
who were instructed in its use. Using the VAMS
tables, t-scores were calculated and used for the sta-
tistical analysis.
Continuous data were expressed as mean and
standard deviation or median (IQR) depending
on the distribution of the data, categorical vari-
ables were presented as count with percentages.
Paired t-test was used to examine the changes
(continuous variables) between pre- and post-
intervention. The effect size (Cohen’s d) was cal-
culated. Statistical tests were performed at the
two-sided significance level of 0.05. The Stata
statistical package was used to analyze the data.
Comments from questionnaire responses were
thematically analyzed by the lead author (NMT).
Themes extracted were discussed in terms of cor-
relations that the authors observed with how use-
ful NMT was scored, comments from staff on
patient engagement, and published literature.
Treatment protocols for the group and individual
clinical contacts followed those described in pub-
lished neurologic music therapy guidelines and
published research.1 Sensorimotor exercises for
a full range of movement including sit-to-stand,
upper, and lower limb (including gait), were facili-
tated using hand percussion, drums, keyboard and
touchscreen tablet, either on stands or hand-held.
Cognitive training exercises, particularly targeting
sustained, alternating, divided and selective atten-
tion, and executive function, were facilitated using
drums and percussion on stands, where patients
copied increasingly complex rhythmic patterns,
self-monitoring for errors, and feeding back to
the therapist in order to indicate attention and
executive function progress. Exercises for speech,
targeting articulation, breath control, speech rate,
speech fluency, and/or word retrieval and produc-
tion utilized familiar song singing, completing the
missing lyric (gap-fill) for target words (for exam-
ple, the word at the end of each chorus line),
melodic intonation therapy, and rhythmic speech
cueing. All exercises were adapted for each
patient’s specific goals, set by or in consultation
with speech therapists, physiotherapists, occupa-
tional therapists, psychologists, and/or patients.
Using commercially available music software
Garageband and Thumbjam, the NMT set-up an
iPad with touchscreen instruments configured to
facilitate a range of exercises for finger dexterity,
including pinch grip using a plectrum stylus.
Treatment delivery took place in the treatment
room and at bedside on the wards. Following
this, rehabilitation assistants were shown how to
use the equipment in order to deliver exercises to
some patients at bedside on days when the NMT
was not working, including over weekends when
fewer multidisciplinary team members were avail-
able. Instructions on which patients would benefit
from the exercises and any specific positioning
requirements were imparted to rehabilitation
assistants by the NMT in-person or by e-mail.
Data were collected on number of patients seen,
sessions delivered, and the number of rehabilita-
tion assistants delivering. Music software did not
collect or transmit any data, it effectively enabled
the iPad to be used as a portable, musical instru-
ment (keyboard, string instrument or drum/
percussion).
This article is written in full compliance with
the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational
Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines.
Over two years 201 patients were referred to NMT
and 177 received interventions. Table 1 shows the
demographic data for these patients. Twenty-four
patients who were referred did not receive NMT
because they were discharged before time became
available to schedule sessions with them. A total
of 675 clinical contacts were delivered including
82 sensorimotor groups, usually including four
patients. The majority of referrals came from speech
and language therapy (89%) and physiotherapy
(75%) (Table 2). The average number of sessions
was 4.8 (SD = 6.06, 95% CI = 0.97). Twenty-eight
sessions were declined. The predominant reason for
patients declining sessions was recorded as fatigue.
Not wanting to attend (for unspecified reasons),
being with a visitor, being too busy, and ‘not feeling
like it’ were also recorded as reasons for declining.
Completed patient, relative, and staff question-
naires rated NMT as ‘helpful,’ tending toward
‘very helpful’ (Table 3). ‘Motivation/Mood,’
‘Concentration’ and ‘Arm and Hand’ received
the highest scores out of five categories patients
were asked to rate. ‘Speech/communication,’
‘walking/mobility’ received the highest ratings
for ‘not helpful’ (Table 4). Relatives and staff
also rated ‘Motivation/mood’ highest (Table 4).
Out of a total of 45 patient responses to ‘Did
NMT help with anything else?’ the majority fell
under the themes of ‘Movement:’ 19 (42%) and
‘Mood:’ 15 (33%) (Appendix A).
Ten (43.4%) out of a total of 23 staff question-
naire comments fell under the theme of ‘Mood’
and seven (30%) under ‘Social.’ Cognition, toler-
ance, adherence, and motivation were also themes
arising (Appendix B). Some staff comments sug-
gested that more NMT would be beneficial for
patients’ rehabilitation (Appendix C).
Eleven responses from relatives reported that
NMT was helpful for patient mood and speech,
building a relative’s understanding of the effects of
stroke (‘understanding the problem’) and confi-
dence with their relative (Appendix D).
Table 5 shows the Visual Analogue Mood Scale
mean scores from the 52 patients who completed
them, with confidence intervals and p values for
each mood pre-/post-a single NMT session.
iPads were not used by rehabilitation assistants to
deliver exercises in the first year of the project. In
the second year, five different rehabilitation assis-
tants delivered 28 sessions to 11 patients over
10 months. In addition, two patients were able to
use the touchscreen instruments independently.
The average age of users was 22, including nine
male and two female patients.
The questionnaire and VAMS data presented here
are not from the full cohort of patients who
received NMT on the wards. Questionnaire data
are missing for 78 patients. This may be for
a variety of reasons, such as cognitive difficulties,
reduced availability of support to help collect the
data, and patients being discharged before question-
naire completion. Bias may have been reduced in
questionnaire ratings and comments, as these data
were collected by staff other than the NMT. Referral
rate, patient engagement and questionnaire data
from patients, staff, and relatives indicate that
NMT was accepted and considered helpful for
stroke rehabilitation and as part of the multidisci-
plinary team, alongside physiotherapy, occupational
therapy, speech therapy, and clinical psychology.
Interdisciplinary joint sessions with NMT are
reported to have helped clarify the referral route
and mechanisms of the music-based interventions.
The portability and variety of functions of the iPad
enabled the rehabilitation assistants to facilitate
more frequent practice for patients, which was
overseen by the NMT. Using such technology to
help increase treatment dosage merits further inves-
tigation. Results correspond with published litera-
ture reporting on the potential benefits of NMT in
acute neurorehabilitation.2–8 VAMS showed non-
significant positive changes, which corresponds
with findings from NMT research12–15 and ques-
tionnaire feedback from patients and staff that they
felt there were benefits for mood (Table 4 and 5).
There are several limitations to this study. We did
not determine how questionnaire and mood data
would differ from that of other disciplines within
the multidisciplinary team, we only collected these
data from patients attending NMT. The effects of the
music-based exercises on functional outcomes were
not established as treatment effects were not mea-
sured. There may be single site bias, so results cannot
be generalized to other acute stroke settings. Some
data on mood before and after clinical contacts were
collected by the NMT, which may have either posi-
tively or negatively influenced patient responses.
Questionnaire ratings made by patients were more
distributed between the categories (motivation/
mood, concentration, etc.) than those of relatives
and staff (Table 4). This might be simply because
patients had direct experience of the interventions,
rather than being observers. It may also reflect their
uncertainty about NMT and all outcomes regarding
their rehabilitation, and their level of clinical knowl-
edge. Staff, particularly multidisciplinary team mem-
bers, may have more of a grasp of the mechanisms of
the music interventions, because of their training and
clinical experience, and so rated each domain more
specifically in terms of how potentially effective each
exercise might be. Speech therapists may have rated
speech/communication more highly than ‘concen-
tration’ simply because they were more frequently
involved in individual sessions for speech/commu-
nication, due to the NMT using one of their treat-
ment rooms. However, the author notes that they
were also particularly interested in what music-based
interventions might offer patients who were strug-
gling to engage in rehabilitation due to the impact of
stroke on cognition and mood. Physiotherapists
observed and co-facilitated the sensorimotor group,
and so saw the benefits for movement, particularly
upper limb, trunk, and pre-gait exercises. Relatives
attended individual sessions predominantly, where
they observed consistently good engagement, the
cognitive demands of the exercises, and the benefits
for sensorimotor rehabilitation.
VAMS data are missing for 125 patients predo-
minantly because they were not cognitively able to
complete them with or without assistance. This
might constitute a further limitation to the study,
as this mood scale is not recommended for assessing
depression with patients who have aphasia or cog-
nitive impairments, or within the first 12 months
post-stroke.29 However, it was used here to measure
intervention-related changes in mood after a single
clinical contact. The VAMS ‘Sad’ category has been
used to determine the treatment effects of beha-
vioral therapy17 (mean = 9 sessions of 58 min).
The cohort of stroke patients was not all acute, but
at different stages post-stroke (mean = 9 months).
Changes in mean scores were slightly different to
those reported here (n = 44 completed treatment),
with a larger score change of ?11.65, and wider
confidence intervals (95%) ?22.30 to ?0.99. The
Dynamic Visual Analogue Mood Scale was not
used, as it still requires testing for validity with
a sufficient sample, at the acute stage, including
patients with aphasia and in the context of an
intervention.30
Speech therapists and physiotherapists on the
wards felt that joint working allowed them to
quickly gain an understanding of how NMT inter-
ventions could benefit patients and be delivered.
The NMT attended meetings to demonstrate
music-based exercises in the cognitive, communi-
cation, and sensorimotor domains, which enabled
the multidisciplinary team to identify which
patients would be suitable for referral. Handover
meetings with physiotherapy were held each week
to ensure optimum quality of movement, fatigue
management and alignment for each patient, in
order to help achieve specific movement goals.
Observing and co-facilitating NMT sessions some-
times assisted speech and language therapists in
finding ways to deliver their interventions, as they
could observe different mechanisms of a patient’s
communicative intent during music-based exer-
cises. They observed that the music and equipment
stimulated arousal, awareness and attention levels
in a particular way, functioning via non-verbal
interactions, such as turn-taking and call and
response using vocalizations or percussion. This
enabled patients with significant cognitive difficul-
ties and/or aphasia to understand and take part,
without the need for verbal instruction. Speech
therapists commented that the music-based exer-
cises contributed toward some patients overcom-
ing low mood and fatigue, thus increasing
engagement in rehabilitation. These comments
correspond with research findings reporting on
the benefits of arousal and affect regulation, learn-
ing, activity-driven plasticity and possibly causing
less fatigue.6,25,26 Where patients declined NMT
sessions due to fatigue, this was not fatigue caused
by the NMT exercises, but fatigue as a symptom of
their stroke or head injury, which would also cause
patients to decline sessions in other clinical areas,
such as physiotherapy. Singing familiar songs and
using songs as gap-fill exercises helped some
patients with, for example aphasia, apraxia, and/
or dysarthria, experience moments of fluent out-
put. Therapists observed this to be motivating for
patients and relatives.
Whether NMT should become part of all acute
stroke multidisciplinary rehabilitation depends on
the evidence-base for interventions being deemed
sufficient, and further investigation into the feasi-
bility of NMT in different acute stroke settings.
The current evidence-base for music-based inter-
ventions with acute stroke is quite small, although
there is a greater body of evidence for interven-
tions at sub-acute and community stage, as
reported in a recent Cochrane review.31
Apps that provide music-based interventions to
improve finger dexterity might be deliverable by
non-NMT staff in order to increase treatment
dosage and improve outcomes for patients. Some
research has shown that using keyboards helps to
improve hand rehabilitation at the acute stage,9
which could translate into using touchscreen key-
board apps. Touchscreen instruments on tablets
have been used to improve finger dexterity follow-
ing stroke; also using a touchscreen stylus
(plectrum) for pinch grip, but this has been in
home-based stroke rehabilitation, not acute.32
There are some case study data to support the
use of touchscreen exercises using music apps
within the first 3-months post-stroke,18 and at
the acute stage,19 however both of these cases
involved highly trained musicians, the latter also
incorporating Functional Electrical Stimulation.
Further research in this area, where the music-
based apps are combined with those of other
Allied Health Professionals (AHPs) within the
multidisciplinary team, might help develop ways
of enhancing treatment dosage cost-effectively, in
combination with face-to-face interventions deliv-
ered by a full team of clinicians at the recom-
mended dosage. This could potentially lead to
self-delivery of exercises by patients using apps,
or delivery with spouse/relative. These exercises
could also continue in the home post-discharge.
Research into music-based exercises for upper
limb hemiparesis on an acute ward improved
arm function and were reported by patients as
the highlight of their rehabilitation process; moti-
vating and enjoyable.9 Two sessions of Melodic
Intonation Therapy not only improved speech in
patients with non-fluent aphasia, but may also
have reduced frustration and risk of withdrawal
from rehabilitation programmes.10 Stroke patients
who listened to self-selected music every day for
two months, made significantly better cognitive
recovery than controls, also experiencing less
depression and less confusion.12
These are examples of the added value, or ‘other
dimension’ (Appendix B, comment No. 8), that
music-based interventions might bring to multidis-
ciplinary team rehabilitation on acute stroke wards.
It could be that these exercises appear less clinical to
patients. Yet, the exercises are goal-driven and of
comparable structure to those delivered by occupa-
tional, speech, and physiotherapy, facilitating
massed practice. The psychological effects and
neural mechanisms of such interventions may
share neural networks for activity-driven plasticity,
including reward, arousal and affect regulation,6
which might lead to enhanced rehabilitation out-
comes and quality of life for patients. They may
also be less fatigue inducing than standard treat-
ments and increase motivation.25,26 Well-designed
studies in the acute setting are warranted in order
to try and determine the treatment effects and neural
mechanisms of music-based interventions.
This study measured the feasibility of delivering
music-based interventions to patients on an acute
stroke ward as part of multidisciplinary team reha-
bilitation. It also collected data to help determine the
acceptability of these interventions by patients, their
relatives, and stroke team clinicians. Based on
patient engagement, number of sessions delivered,
and questionnaire data, it is feasible to set-up a two-
day NMT service within the multidisciplinary teams
serving the ward. A similar service would need to be
trialed on other acute stroke wards in order to
establish whether it would be generalizable.
Questionnaire data indicate that patients and rela-
tives thought that NMT was helpful, possibly for
mood, movement, and concentration and in facil-
itating social interactions. Speech and language
therapists observed the positive impact on arousal,
engagement, and mood as precursors to functional
engagement. Neurologic Music Therapy was
received enthusiastically by patients, their relatives,
and staff throughout the project.
This evaluation of the feasibility and acceptability
of NMT in acute stroke rehabilitation, including the
use of touchscreen instruments, provides some pre-
liminary data that might support the development of
research into treatment efficacy in this setting, com-
paring the interventions and patient engagement with
those of other disciplines, and establishing potential
effects on recovery rate and hospital length of stay.
