Document Infomation ===========>
Title=pnas201302328 9201..9208
Author=null
Subject=null
Keywords=null
Creator=Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.510/W Unicode
Producer=Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)
Creation Date=java.util.GregorianCalendar[time=1369243449000,areFieldsSet=true,areAllFieldsSet=true,lenient=false,zone=java.util.SimpleTimeZone[id=GMT+05:30,offset=19800000,dstSavings=3600000,useDaylight=false,startYear=0,startMode=0,startMonth=0,startDay=0,startDayOfWeek=0,startTime=0,startTimeMode=0,endMode=0,endMonth=0,endDay=0,endDayOfWeek=0,endTime=0,endTimeMode=0],firstDayOfWeek=1,minimalDaysInFirstWeek=1,ERA=1,YEAR=2013,MONTH=4,WEEK_OF_YEAR=21,WEEK_OF_MONTH=4,DAY_OF_MONTH=22,DAY_OF_YEAR=142,DAY_OF_WEEK=4,DAY_OF_WEEK_IN_MONTH=4,AM_PM=1,HOUR=10,HOUR_OF_DAY=22,MINUTE=54,SECOND=9,MILLISECOND=0,ZONE_OFFSET=19800000,DST_OFFSET=0]
Modification Date=java.util.GregorianCalendar[time=1369892405000,areFieldsSet=true,areAllFieldsSet=true,lenient=false,zone=java.util.SimpleTimeZone[id=GMT+05:30,offset=19800000,dstSavings=3600000,useDaylight=false,startYear=0,startMode=0,startMonth=0,startDay=0,startDayOfWeek=0,startTime=0,startTimeMode=0,endMode=0,endMonth=0,endDay=0,endDayOfWeek=0,endTime=0,endTimeMode=0],firstDayOfWeek=1,minimalDaysInFirstWeek=1,ERA=1,YEAR=2013,MONTH=4,WEEK_OF_YEAR=22,WEEK_OF_MONTH=5,DAY_OF_MONTH=30,DAY_OF_YEAR=150,DAY_OF_WEEK=5,DAY_OF_WEEK_IN_MONTH=5,AM_PM=0,HOUR=11,HOUR_OF_DAY=11,MINUTE=10,SECOND=5,MILLISECOND=0,ZONE_OFFSET=19800000,DST_OFFSET=0]
Trapped=null

Context===========>
PERSPECTIVE
Broader perspective on ecosystem
sustainability: Consequences for
decision making
Roy C. Sidlea,1, William H. Bensonb, John F. Carrigerb, and Toshitaka Kamaic
aEcosystems Research Division, National Exposure Research Laboratory, US Environmental Protection Agency-ORD, Athens, GA 30605;
bGulf Ecology Division, National Health and Environmental Effects Laboratory, US Environmental Protection Agency-ORD, Gulf Breeze, FL
32561; and cResearch Center on Landslides, Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan
Edited by Stephen R. Carpenter, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, and approved April 2, 2013 (received for review February 4, 2013)
Although the concept of ecosystem sustainability has a long-term focus, it is often viewed from a static system perspective. Because most
ecosystems are dynamic, we explore sustainability assessments from three additional perspectives: resilient systems; systems where tipping
points occur; and systems subject to episodic resetting. Whereas foundations of ecosystem resilience originated in ecology, recent discussions
have focused on geophysical attributes, and it is recognized that dynamic system components may not return to their former state following
perturbations. Tipping points emerge when chronic changes (typically anthropogenic, but sometimes natural) push ecosystems to thresholds
that cause collapse of process and function and may become permanent. Ecosystem resetting occurs when episodic natural disasters breach
thresholds with little or no warning, resulting in long-term changes to environmental attributes or ecosystem function. An example of
sustainability assessment of ecosystem goods and services along the Gulf Coast (USA) demonstrates the need to include both the resilient and
dynamic nature of biogeomorphic components. Mountain road development in northwest Yunnan, China, makes rivers and related habitat
vulnerable to tipping points. Ecosystems reset by natural disasters are also presented, emphasizing the need to understand the magnitude
frequency and interrelationships among major disturbances, as shown by (i) the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and resulting tsunami,
including how unsustainable urban development exacerbates geodisaster propagation, and (ii) repeated major earthquakes and associated
geomorphic and vegetation disturbances in Papua New Guinea. Although all of these ecosystem perturbations and shifts are individually
recognized, they are not embraced in contemporary sustainable decision making.
ecosystem stressors | complex system behavior | sustainability analysis | cascading effects | coastal zone management
The concept of sustainability increasingly
permeates government, academic, and
private-sector organizational mantras. Sus-
tainability is defined in many ways, but a
common thread lies in its goal of harmo-
nizing environmental, economic, and so-
cial opportunities for the benefit of present
and future generations (1–4). In ecosystem
research and management, the underlying
foundations of environmental sustainability
are system attributes—biosphere, hydro-
sphere, geosphere, and atmosphere, and
the linkages among them. Superimposed
on these natural ecosystem attributes is the
human component, consisting of humans
themselves, their economies, institutions,
infrastructures, cultures, and related land
use (5–7).
Belief in the balance of nature gave rise
to early ecological concepts such as carry-
ing capacity and maximum sustained yield,
which view ecosystems as permanent in
form and structure that strive to recover to
an “equilibrium” state following distur-
bances (8–10); thus, much thought and
research have been invested in incorporat-
ing the concept of resilience into sustainabil-
ity assessments (11–13). Resilience addresses
the ability of ecosystems to absorb change
and disturbance and adapt to small-scale
perturbations, both in the length of time
it takes to recover from external stress
and in the magnitude of stress from which
a system can recover without rapidly moving
to a new stable condition (7, 14). While
many resilience concepts evolved from
ecology (15), resilience has relevance to
other ecosystem characteristics, such as
the sustainability of surface water (16–18)
and groundwater (19). Although perturbed
ecosystems and components do not always
return to the exact state before a distur-
bance, there is a recognized bound on the
breadth of resilience (20): if a system is
viewed as resilient, it is generally perceived
as remaining within specified “bounds.”
While this notion of an essentially finite
system is accepted even by critics of sus-
tainable development (21), the concepts of
permanent ecosystem change are typically
absent from sustainability discussions.
Tipping points are encountered one step
beyond ecosystem resilience and represent
thresholds that, when crossed, result in
catastrophic collapse of processes or func-
tions that are extremely difficult to restore.
These tipping points are closely associated
with complex system behavior where small
and cumulative anthropogenic and/or nat-
ural stressors push ecosystems toward critical
transitions, causing an abrupt shift from one
state to another (16, 22, 23). Negative tipping
points are applied to projected collapses in
ecosystems related to climate change (24),
climate anomalies (25), and land-use change
(26). In most scenarios, protracted dis-
turbance or stress causes the system to
lose resilience, followed by an abrupt al-
teration in state once the tipping point is
exceeded (27). Positive tipping points may
occur when interventions in degraded eco-
systems allow processes and populations to
recover with the help of human innova-
tion (28).
A different kind of threshold is crossed
when episodic natural disasters affect eco-
systems. These are reached suddenly with
little or no warning, and the resulting im-
pacts on ecosystems can be dramatic and
far-reaching (16). Examples include the
devastating 2011 earthquake-tsunami di-
saster in eastern Japan (29); lahars ema-
nating from the 1985 volcanic activity at
Nevado del Ruiz, Colombia (30); climate
Author contributions: R.C.S. conceived the perspective; and R.C.S.,
W.H.B., J.F.C., and T.K. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: sidle.roy@
epa.gov.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/
lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1302328110/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1302328110 PNAS | June 4, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 23 | 9201–9208
PE
RS
PE
CT
IV
E
change-induced glacial dam collapse and
jökulhlaups in the Karakoram Himalaya
(31); isostatic rebound in the Copper River
Delta, Alaska, following the Great Alaska
Earthquake of 1964 that caused a seaward
shift in the salt marsh (32); and massive
landslides in central China during a major
earthquake in 1920 (33). These were all ex-
treme events, but more frequent disasters of
smaller magnitude can also inflict long-
term ecosystem resetting, albeit at smaller
scales. Although it is difficult to predict the
timing and areal extent of sudden, episodic
disasters, probabilistic hazard maps, assess-
ments, and predictive models can help guide
sustainability analysis and thus reduce risk in
vulnerable regions (34–36). Furthermore,
knowledge gained from episodic disasters
can help break down barriers based on past
experiences and ideas and reframe future
decisions by noticing and bracketing new ev-
idence, working cognitively to elucidate in-
terconnected processes, and retaining this
knowledge (37).
Because ecosystems are intrinsically linked
to dynamic earth system properties, con-
fusion persists about what sustainable
ecosystems and management practices are.
Vulnerability analysis links sustainability
and the stressors and perturbations that in-
teract within resilient ecosystems and their
socioeconomic counterparts (6, 38), but
challenges to connecting sustainability with
episodic threshold changes remain (10, 16).
Given that an inherent tenet of sustainabil-
ity is long-term viability of ecosystem func-
tion, better focus needs to be placed on the
natural resources that form the backbone
of these systems—their spatial and temporal
attributes and resilience—and how anthro-
pogenic and natural stressors compromise
system resilience, breach tipping points,
and cause episodic change.
Implementing a Broader Sustainability
Perspective
Including sustainability in ecosystem re-
search and assessment requires fundamen-
tal knowledge of earth system dynamics at
appropriate scales to assess future trajecto-
ries of rural and community development,
food security, disaster mitigation, reclamation,
infrastructure, site productivity, hazardous
waste disposal, water use, and contaminant
transport. Once spatial and temporal scales
of sustainability are defined, ecosystem
attributes must be carefully articulated. Be-
cause sustainability has a long-term focus,
ecosystem resilience should be incorporated
into these attributes (6, 14, 18, 20, 27, 38)
(Fig. 1). Chronic agents of ecosystem change,
such as soil development, disease, and eco-
logical succession, are accommodated by
resiliency, as are minor episodic events (e.g.,
small earthquakes, floods, wildfires).
In cases where long-term anthropogenic
pressures such as forest conversion, wetland
destruction, overhunting/overfishing, poor
irrigation practices, and overgrazing have
impacted ecosystems, tipping points in sys-
tems may be reached. Chronic disturbances
or changes may exhaust ecosystem resil-
ience, leading to a rapid change of state
(7, 27, 39). Anthropogenic perturbations can
also lower the initiation threshold for certain
natural disasters (40–42), complicating ex-
ceedance thresholds for ecosystem change.
Furthermore, when major episodic processes
exceed thresholds of resilience, they may
reset ecosystem attributes (16) (Fig. 1). For
example, sustainable development in cities
such as San Francisco and Tokyo must
consider how major earthquakes may alter
topography, coastal conditions, and vegeta-
tion, and how ecosystem resilience accom-
modates chronic changes such as sea-level
rise and vegetation change induced by global
climate change. This decision making can be
improved by adapting and learning from
past experiences such as natural disasters or
more subtle signs of resilience loss (14, 37).
Dynamic ecosystem attributes also affect
how we assess sustainable management of
rural lands. Widespread conversion of trop-
ical forests to cultivated agriculture, planta-
tions, pasture, residential developments, and
recreational use has led to increased erosion,
water stress, nutrient depletion, and loss of
biodiversity (43–45). Although chronic eco-
system shifts are often the focus of sustain-
ability assessments, we need to understand
how land uses exacerbate episodic processes
such as landslides, floods, wildfires, and
droughts that can reshape systems. Several
examples are presented in the next section
illustrating how management decisions
could benefit from broader sustainability
assessments.
Understanding the potential for natural
change in ecosystems is essential not only to
the environmental “pillar” of sustainability
but also to economic and social compo-
nents. The natural system, along with eco-
nomic and social counterparts, shapes and
influences the well-being of individuals, so-
cieties, and ecosystems, both now and in
the future (2, 10, 14, 46). For individuals,
meeting basic needs such as food, shelter,
and health maintenance is a prerequisite to
economic and social well-being. These are
met through adequate access to health care,
employment, and education. Well-being
for ecological systems can be defined using
concepts similar to those for humans. The
quality and quantity of habitat, including
all facets required for survival, mainte-
nance, and proliferation of populations and
ecological functions, are analogous to hu-
man “wealth.” Although nonhuman species
and their ecological systems are unlikely to
be as aware of their own well-being as
humans, drawing the parallel between well-
being of humans and nonhumans recog-
nizes interconnections among the natural,
economic, and social components of sus-
tainability (46). If, for example, a major
power plant or toxic waste repository is sited
in an area that has potential for episodic
system change (e.g., major earthquake,
flooding), there are strong implications for
both economics and society. More gradual
changes that fall within the resilience ca-
pacity of ecosystems may test the limits of
societal adaptability and may incur signifi-
cant economic costs to cope. A prominent
example of gradual environmental change
is the effect of sea-level rise on coastal eco-
systems and communities (47). A socio-
economic dilemma is that huge investments
Ecosystem Attributes
• Biosphere
• Hydrosphere
• Geosphere
•Atmosphere
Ecosystem
Resilience
T
h
r
e
s
h
o
l
d
s
Floods
Earthquakes
Volcanos 
Drought
Landslides
Storm surges
Tsunami
Ice dam 
collapse
Natural Re-
setting of 
Ecosystems
Static system 
sustainability analysis
Broader focus of resilient 
ecosystem sustainability analysis
Chronic ecosystem change
• soil development
• climate anomalies and change
• weathering processes
• succession
Anthropogenic change
Traditional Sustainable Decision-Making
Challenges to Decision-Making
Fig. 1. Ecosystem attributes of sustainability. How assessments and decision making may change with chronic
perturbations and episodic resetting.
9202 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1302328110 Sidle et al.
continue to be made in increasingly vul-
nerable coastal areas when a philosophy of
adaptation should be encouraged instead
(48). In such cases, although the ecosystems
themselves may be resilient, socioeconomic
issues are driving the sustainability agenda.
Examples of Improving Sustainability
Analysis in Different Ecosystems
As noted, most ecosystem sustainability
assessments are conducted within static or,
at best, resilient settings. Few assessments
consider the potential for tipping points,
such as induced by climate change or
land degradation. Even greater challenges to
sustainability arise when system thresholds
are exceeded because of natural disasters or
episodic environmental change (16). Exam-
ples exist where sustainability assessments
for land, coastal, energy, and industrial de-
velopment are satisfactory for static or
resilient ecosystems but become highly
problematic when subtle anthropogenic or
natural pressures push systems to tipping
points or when thresholds are exceeded
due to episodic change. Here we present
four cases where resilience, tipping points, or
ecosystem resetting should be considered in
sustainability assessments. Key environmen-
tal issues and attributes of each system, along
with natural and anthropogenic stressors, are
detailed in Table S1 with suggested corrective
measures that support sustainability.
Cases That Would Benefit from Consid-
ering Ecosystem Resilience and Tipping
Points. Coastal zone management, Gulf of
Mexico. Gulf of Mexico ecosystems are es-
sential to regional socioeconomics, and pro-
vide a foundation for rare, unique, and valued
fish and wildlife species. Gulf Coast estuaries
and wetlands are feeding, spawning, and
nursery habitats for a rich assemblage of fish
and wildlife, including shorebirds, colonial
nesting birds, and migratory waterfowl. How-
ever, increasing population pressures in the
Gulf of Mexico create increased use of and
demands on Gulf resources (Table S1).
Given the variety of ecosystem services
provided on the Gulf Coast, including com-
mercial and sport fisheries, biodiversity, and
recreation, we must understand how they
interact with dynamic coastal features. For
example, barrier islands, wetlands, sloughs,
and the coastline itself collectively form a
natural defense against landfall hurricanes
as well as buffer the coast from floodwaters
emanating from rivers (49). These features
also provide diverse habitats for an array of
fish and other marine resources. An impor-
tant aspect of this complex system that is
often overlooked in development, manage-
ment, and restoration efforts is the transient
nature of the biogeomorphic attributes. Al-
though delta building is a progressive process
(50), once these sites are developed, we tend
to view the systems as static and attempt to
force them to prior conditions following
extreme natural events. Similarly, barrier is-
lands, beaches, reefs, and mainland shorelines
are naturally dynamic, responding to major
storms and sea-level rise (51, 52). Anthro-
pogenic activities exacerbate coastal system
dynamics, including coastal development;
dredging sediments from rivers; enhanced
riverine flood flows from development; in-
creased nutrient fluxes and oxygen depletion;
sea-level rise due to subsidence and climate
change; coastal erosion control structures;
and alteration of vegetation (50, 53–56).
Turning a blind eye toward biogeo-
morphic processes within coastal systems
poses difficulties in separating anthropo-
genic effects from natural phenomena, and
can misguide restoration efforts. As such,
there are strong implications for the lu-
crative commercial and recreational fishing
industry along the Gulf Coast. A recent
report from a federal advisory group (57)
emphasizes balancing ecosystem sustain-
ability and resilience with other priorities
(e.g., navigation and structural flood con-
trol) in restoration efforts. Nevertheless, these
proposed tradeoffs would benefit in the long
term by recognizing natural dynamics of
barrier islands and coastal features in this
complex ecosystem, as well as how such
changes and resilience can affect fisheries
and other ecological services.
Significant restoration efforts along the
Gulf Coast have focused on coastal regions of
the Mississippi Deltaic and Chenier Plains,
where wetlands are being lost to the sea. In
Louisiana, 4,877 km2 have been lost since the
1930s, comprising 80% of US coastal wetland
losses (58, 59). Land loss in Louisiana has
been called a “national emergency,” with
up to 4,533 km2 threatened under status
quo management (59). Louisiana wetlands
are significant to the welfare of the United
States—?80% of Louisiana fisheries species
use wetlands for nurseries and 75% of
fisheries landings in the Gulf of Mexico are
adjacent to Louisiana (60). Moreover, in-
land flooding from storm surges, exacer-
bated by loss of wetlands, swamps, and
barrier islands, threatens property, people,
infrastructure, and unique cultural heritages
(59). On average, Gulf Coast communities
lose $14 billion annually from storms, which
could be compounded to $350 billion by in-
creased development and land loss (61).
Both natural and human factors have led
to wetland loss in Louisiana (62). Processes
identified in wetland losses range from eu-
static sea-level rise and delta construction or
destruction to modifications such as failed
reclamation projects, canal construction, and
impoundments (63). Subsidence from natu-
ral compaction and restricted sediment input
caused by levees frequently leads to wetland
loss (62), but debates about the strength of
the effects of natural and anthropogenic
factors on land-loss rates are ongoing. Loca-
tions and time periods with exceedances of
natural geological subsidence rates might
identify where some anthropogenic stressors
have accelerated wetlands loss (64). A recent
study found that decadal changes in sub-
sidence rates trended with hydrocarbon ex-
traction, indicating a historical influence of
the latter on accelerated loss of wetlands in
some areas (65).
Wetland restoration and risk reduction
measures are being implemented to prevent
future, as well as redress past, losses to human
and wildlife habitat. Management options
being developed and applied in wetlands re-
newal and land building initiatives include
large-scale river diversions, marsh terracing,
sediment-slurry additions, plantings, dam
modifications, shoreline protection, sediment
fences, and placement of dredged materials
(59, 66–68). Major river diversions are critical
to supplying sediment and nutrients, pre-
cipitating sulfides, and preventing saltwater
intrusion in coastal wetlands, but require
understanding of diverse considerations dur-
ing implementation (59, 66). For example,
positive and negative ancillary impacts on
a range of attributes including eutrophica-
tion, hazardous algal blooms, and salinity
changes in estuaries could occur from di-
version discharges (60, 66, 68). Restoration
decisions require understanding dynamic
surficial and subsidence processes (63). Salt
marsh areas can reach such a low vertical
elevation threshold that management must
focus on complete rebuilding (69). The ef-
fectiveness and uncertainties of land building
and sustaining projects for keeping pace with
sea-level rise, subsidence, and other factors
are being both investigated and questioned.
For example, predictive modeling has shown
that sea-level rise and subsidence could
outpace many of the benefits from sediment
delivery, especially if river sediment loads
are not restored to levels before damming
(70). However, immediate initiation of proj-
ects to optimally decrease land loss and/or
move communities away from danger is
needed because of the increased future costs of
delaying these efforts due to uncertainties (70).
The importance of improving decision
making and learning capabilities in the
Gulf region has spurred recent activities
by private, federal, state, tribal, local, and
nongovernmental entities. The Gulf Coast
Restoration Task Force, established by
executive order to address long-term Gulf-
wide restoration beyond the 2010 oil spill,
has identified tipping points as one critical
learning need (58). Efforts of a Science
Coordination Team expanded ideas in this
report (58) to include additional actions
for increasing resiliency in habitat types
and coastal communities (71). Focused
work on coastal sustainability and safety
issues has culminated in the most recent
Louisiana Coastal Master Plan (59), which
assesses scientific and value-based needs for
land-loss prevention decisions, including
resiliency-related issues (Fig. 2). For deci-
sions addressing land losses, considerations
Sidle et al. PNAS | June 4, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 23 | 9203
PE
RS
PE
CT
IV
E
include ecosystems services (e.g., fisheries
and nature-based tourism), socioeconomic
issues (e.g., protecting strategic assets and
significant cultural sites), and threats to re-
siliency (e.g., sea-level rise and invasive spe-
cies) (59). Defining variables and criteria that
impact stakeholders and ecological viability,
along with other important factors such as
causal relations and uncertainties, will support
management efforts to achieve desired and
avoid undesired outcomes.
Due to the magnitude of the land-loss
crisis, improved governance capabilities for
deriving, using, and exchanging process
knowledge across scales of decision making
is being implemented. The Coastal Protec-
tion and Restoration Authority (CPRA) was
established to coordinate planning, imple-
mentation, and enforcement for restoring
and protecting coastal Louisiana (59). De-
velopment of CPRA management plans in-
volves community stakeholders, industry
representatives, government officials, and
experts. The CPRA organizes teams to im-
plement selected projects, including evalu-
ating and addressing design considerations,
implementation barriers, and regional con-
sequences, and develops an adaptive man-
agement framework to foster participatory
benefits from collaboration, coordination,
and communication (59).
Ensuring resilience in complex environ-
ments with multiple stressors requires man-
agement that is flexible and responsive to
new information. Elements of structured
decision making can be adapted for highly
dynamic environments including frequently
reexamining objectives, adapting manage-
ment actions to changes, and incorporating
model uncertainty into predictions (72).
Although private and public decision makers
work to prevent shifts from desirable to un-
desirable ecosystem states, consideration of
the dynamic and varied nature of Gulf
Coast ecosystems could improve man-
agement in all phases of decisions. Im-
proving the decision-making process also
requires a critical appraisal of the collection,
interpretation, use, and communication of
knowledge on ecological and social dy-
namics at all scales of governance. In addi-
tion to understanding the dynamic nature of
Gulf ecosystems, addressing concerns of
community members is essential to make
informed tradeoffs in large-scale restoration
projects.
Episodic erosion related to expansion of
roads, Yunnan, China. Significant increases
in both surface and landslide erosion caused
by road construction in the mountains of
northwest Yunnan, China, affect not only site
productivity but also exacerbate sediment
delivery to rivers (73). Unimproved roads are
proliferating in this developing region due
primarily to economic and tourism pressures
(74, 75). This region is home of the Three
Parallel Rivers of Yunnan Protected Areas,
designated by the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) as a World Heritage site. In this
unique geologic and ecological area, the Jin-
sha, Salween, and Mekong Rivers run ap-
proximately parallel in deep gorges within
less than a 100-km wide corridor. Sediments
routed into the Salween and Mekong Rivers
and their tributaries eventually flow through
poorer nations (Myanmar, Thailand, Laos,
and Cambodia) that depend on these waters
for fishing, aquaculture, irrigation, and other
livelihoods. In addition to degrading site
productivity and water quality, sediments
impact aquatic habitat, damage hydropower
facilities, and transfer pollutants. Excessive
sediment deposition in steeper headwaters
may also increase the potential for flooding
and catastrophic debris flows (76). The larg-
est sediment inputs from mountain roads to
rivers do not emanate from surface erosion
but from landslides (Fig. 3A). Landslide ero-
sion along recently constructed roads in these
mountains varies from about 3,000–48,000
Mg·ha?1·y?1 (74), values that dwarf aver-
age landslide erosion rates along forest
roads in unstable terrain in the northwest
USA (60 Mg·ha?1·y?1), which were suffi-
cient to suspend forest-logging operations
on federal lands due to concerns over
aquatic habitat (40). Surface erosion from
and along these roads, although significant,
is typically <10% of the landslide erosion.
Oftentimes, >80% of the landslide and sur-
face-eroded sediments directly reach stream
and river systems (Fig. 3B) (76).
Thus, a more sustainable approach to rural
road development in Yunnan would be to
consider potential landslides as the primary
sediment source and to evaluate alternatives
for road location, construction, and structural
and nonstructural protection against end uses
and socioeconomic benefits. Many newly
constructed roads in northeastern Yunnan
are inoperable during wet seasons or require
Socioeconomic Drivers:
• Energy supplies
•Water supplies
• Food security
• Housing
• Equity
• Community bonds & heritage
• Income & employment
Environmental Issues:
• Hydrodynamics
• Land building & preservation
• Geological subsidence
• Habitat  availability
• Carbon sequestration
• Nitrogen uptake
• Fish & wildlife viability
Criteria to avoid tipping points:
• Sea level rise/Subsidence/Vertical accretion
• Rainfall /Storm patterns/Storm surge depth
•Wave & wind erosion
• Inundation timing & depth
• Sediment/Nutrients delivery & assimilation
• Risks from pollutants, invasive species,      
saltwater intrusion, salinity levels
•Marsh collapse threshold
• Vegetation structure & function
• Barrier shoreline morphology
•Wetland morphology
Flood risk assessment
Land building & preservation 
assessment
Impacts on:
• Ecosystem services
• Public & private property
• Commerce & employment
• Human health & safety
• Cultural heritage
Socioeconomic tradeoffs:
• Operation & maintenance costs
• Distribution of risks
• Oil & gas infrastructure support
• Navigation support
• Loss of cultural heritage
Sustainable 
Management Plan
+ -
Implementation/Adaptive 
managementOutreach and engagement
Expert 
knowledge 
(science-based, 
traditional, etc.)  
Fig. 2. Sustainability assessment example for land-loss issues in coastal Louisiana (59).
9204 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1302328110 Sidle et al.
extensive maintenance to remove landslide
sediment, which eventually makes its way
into rivers. In the worst cases, mountain road
construction is abandoned, leaving no access
and a legacy of sedimentation problems.
Examples of landslide-related deaths along
these lightly traveled mountain routes have
already been reported (76). Current de-
velopment is paying little attention to road
location or construction methods to control
the mass wasting of rock and soil (40). These
secondary roads are typically constructed
with hydraulic shovels, back hoes, or in-
discriminate blasting, and the excavated
material is simply disposed of onto slopes
below the road. Much of the terrain is very
steep (>30°) with few breaks in gradient,
and thus once a landslide initiates along a
road there is little chance of sediment en-
trapment on the slope. Until urgent attention
is directed toward this problem, local resi-
dents and downstream communities will bear
the burden of such unsustainable practices,
not to mention damage to fragile terrestrial
and aquatic habitats.
This example shows how ecosystems could
be pushed to tipping points because of poor
management decisions. Consequences that
have appeared or could develop include (i)
extensive road-related landslides and surface
erosion that progressively strip soil to the
point where vegetation is altered and habi-
tation downslope is unsafe; (ii) degraded
water quality exerting long-term downstream
impacts; (iii) catastrophic debris flows in
sediment-laden headwaters; and (iv) impacts
on livelihoods or economies of downstream
water users. An effective sustainability as-
sessment before extensive road construction
and other land development activities in this
mountainous region should include land-
slide hazard assessments and analysis of
potential trigger mechanisms with proba-
bility thresholds for different road locations
and construction methods (Fig. 4). Ac-
ceptable levels of landslide and surface
erosion need to be articulated, as well as
thresholds that equate to tipping points,
that is, where site productivity, human wel-
fare, ecological attributes, or river conditions
are severely impacted in the long term.
Management activities (e.g., road build-
ing) could be constrained to options that
would not approach tipping points.
Cases That Would Have Benefited from
Considering Ecosystem Resetting. Cas-
cading effects of linked episodic disasters
and urban development, Tohoku, Japan. The
complex cascade of damage in the Pacific
coastal region of Tohoku, Japan, was initially
triggered by the March 11, 2011, Great East
Japan Earthquake. This was the largest earth-
quake ever measured in Japan in terms of
groundmotion,magnitude (M= 9.0), shaking
duration, and magnitude and number of
aftershocks. Much of the coastal damage oc-
curred when a huge tsunami, with run-up
heights exceeding 39 m in some areas, struck
within 30–40 min of the earthquake (29) (Fig.
5A). Even with the most advanced tsunami
warning system in the world, a large per-
centage of the 20,000+ lives lost in this disaster
was directly attributed to tsunami impacts.
The tsunami inundated dikes and breakwaters
along the coast, bringing into question the
protective value of such countermeasures for
truly episodic events. On one hand, it can be
argued that these countermeasures (although
breached) ameliorated the extent of tsunami
damage; on the other, a case can be made that
Fig. 3. Landslides along a road constructed in 2002 in the upper Mekong River basin near Weixi, China, northwest
Yunnan Province. (A) A large landslide originating in the cutslope of the road killed six people traveling in a minivan. (B)
Most of the sediment from the cutslope failure and shallow fillslope landslides directly entered the stream channel,
posing a future threat for episodic evacuation. Reproduced with kind permission from Springer Science+Business
Media: from ref. 76, figure 2a, Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010.
Socioeconomic Drivers:
• economic ties to remote 
villages
• hydropower development
• tourism
• national defense
• evacuation routes
Environmental Issues:
• landslide susceptibility 
• rainfall thresholds
• earthquakes
• surface erosion potential
• site productivity
• water quality/downstream effects
Criteria to avoid tipping points:
• levels of landslide & surface erosion
• loss of site productivity
• water quality/habitat degradation
• probability of massive debris flows
• risk of human welfare problems
Surface erosion assessment
Landslide assessment
• rainfall
• earthquakes
Impacts on:
•Water quality
• Site Productivity
• Human welfare
• Debris flows
•Aquatic habitat
Socioeconomic tradeoffs:
• Necessity of the road
• Road location/alternate routes
• Construction alternatives/costs
• Long-term maintenance needs
Sustainable 
Management Plan
+ - 
Fig. 4. Sustainability assessment example in ecosystems of northwestern Yunnan, China, where extensive road
networks are being proposed in steep terrain with protected river basins.
Sidle et al. PNAS | June 4, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 23 | 9205
PE
RS
PE
CT
IV
E
such measures may lead to a false sense of
security for residents and that emphasizing
disaster prevention education is more effec-
tive, particularly in a nation where residents
are aware of such hazards (29).
Along with the lives that were lost during
this composite disaster, extensive infrastruc-
ture damage occurred including roads, rail-
ways, artificial fills, lifelines, and earthen
dam collapse, and some 76,000 homes were
destroyed (Fig. 5). Although reinforced con-
crete structures mitigated some of the dam-
age (77), the combination of earthquake and
subsequent tsunami waves liquefied foun-
dation materials and actually toppled many
reinforced structures (Fig. 5C). Associated
“natural” disasters affected by the earth-
quake/tsunami included fires, landslides, and
debris flows. The largest long-term conse-
quence of the disaster is the accident at the
Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant No. 1. After
the earthquake, the two most-affected nu-
clear reactors were shut down successfully;
however, earthquake damage to the electrical
feeder lines required that backup generators
supply power to emergency cooling systems
for the reactors. Within less than 1 h,
the backup generators were inundated by
the tsunami surge, causing power loss to the
cooling systems. Subsequent actions taken to
deal with the system failures resulted in a
release of radioactive material into the en-
vironment. The regional deposition of radi-
oisotopes may have long-term implications
for agricultural production and land use
throughout coastal Fukushima Prefecture
and neighboring regions (78). Furthermore,
evidence exists that cesium has penetrated
the bark of Japanese cedar (the most im-
portant regional commercial tree species)
to the extent that it may have contaminated
wood to be used in housing and furniture
construction. The Fukushima government
is attempting to mitigate economic impacts
of the disaster by supporting the local
forest industry, thus exacerbating this con-
tamination problem.
This catastrophic set of disasters underlines
the necessity for concurrent hazard analysis in
sustainability assessments and decision mak-
ing. The cumulative cascade of disasters—
earthquakes, tsunami, landslides/debris flows,
fires, radioactive releases from damaged
power plants—emphasizes the need to base
environmental safeguards on joint probabili-
ties of the occurrence of multiple, interrelated
hazards in dynamic settings. Siting criteria
and contingency plans for facilities such as
nuclear power plants that pose severe envi-
ronmental risks if compromised must care-
fully consider the range and interaction of
geohazards. Whereas the vulnerable sub-
duction zone off Japan’s east coast is known
for its earthquake potential, the combination
of episodic effects that occurred on March 11,
2011, together with power outages, were not
anticipated in the siting and emergency
planning of the Fukushima power plants.
The radioactive releases that followed now
bring into question the need for contin-
gency planning that could anticipate such
human and environmental exposures (in
time and space) and how to proceed with
managing contaminated areas (79, 80). By
reinterpreting planning and response strat-
egies based on experiences gained during
this multifaceted disaster, decision makers
can learn ways of promoting more sustain-
able approaches of mitigating risk (37). Al-
though human health must be of paramount
concern, related issues include soil and
water contamination and equitable com-
pensation to owners of contaminated areas,
as well as science-based decisions on future
land-use trajectories in affected regions. In
hindsight, sustainability assessments in tec-
tonically active coastal settings should con-
sider such low-frequency, high-magnitude
events and weigh the risks of siting vul-
nerable facilities there. Additionally, assess-
ments must evaluate long-term ecosystem
changes that follow uplift, subsidence, coast-
line alterations, and sedimentation (81, 82).
In the shadow of the damage caused by
tsunami waves, more than 200 residential lots
in Sendai City were impacted (Fig. 5B).
Among these, at least 50 residential lots were
damaged by landslides in the urban region,
and several hundred houses were destroyed
by landslides, all of which were associated
with artificial landforms, especially valley fills
(embankments), created during residential
development on slopes (83) (Fig. 5B). In-
frequent, very large magnitude earthquakes
(M ? 8) have occurred off the eastern coast
of Japan, but smaller major earthquakes
(M ? 7) have struck much closer to the
mainland with greater frequency and caused
more severe damage in this urban region. In
particular, the 1978 Miyagi Prefecture Off
Shore Earthquake (M = 7.4) disaster was the
first case of a modern urban complex affected
by a major earthquake (84). Before this
earthquake, Japan had experienced several
decades of postwar growth (1954–1973) that
affected socioeconomic conditions and in-
creased the demand for labor and housing in
large cities, such as Sendai City. Concur-
rently, energy sources evolved from charcoal
to fossil fuels, eliminating harvesting of for-
ests around the urban area. Even after the
1978 earthquake, Sendai City continued to
expand in response to population growth,
especially during the bubble economy from
the mid-1980s through the early 1990s, with
large numbers of residential lots being con-
structed on surrounding hillsides. Crests of
hills were removed and valleys were filled by
soils from cuts and industrial waste. The poor
quality of fills and degraded subsurface
water drainage were major contributors to
the widespread valley fill landslides that
occurred in the urban region during the
2011 earthquake (83). In contrast, smaller
cities in Japan experienced less population
growth, thus precluding the need for ex-
tensive fill construction for residential lots
on hillsides. As such, the population dy-
namics and urban development in the
Tohoku region during the past half-century
were reflected in the distribution of urban
landslides induced by the 2011 earthquake
Fig. 5. Ecosystem impacts and urban/residential damage caused by the March 11, 2011, earthquake (M = 9.0) and
tsunami off the east coast of Japan. (A) Tsunami damage and potential ecosystem changes along the coastline north
of Sendai (US Navy photo; D. McCord). (B) Homes and roads built on valley fills in Sendai destroyed by slope collapse
(valley fill-type landslide). (C ) Overturned reinforced concrete building with a pile foundation in Tohoku Prefecture, an
example of a complex disaster where earthquake shaking liquefied the foundation ground and subsequent tsunami
waves overcame resistance to pull-out forces.
9206 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1302328110 Sidle et al.
(83). Current government relocation of
coastal communities to inland hillsides is
designed to provide safe residential/business
sites as well as bolster the devastated local
economy. However, cuts and fills used to
implement this massive relocation exemplify
how power relations and mismatches of
informational flows create a scenario where
government decision makers ignore lessons
from past experiences instead of retaining
this knowledge and acting accordingly (37).
The disproportional number of landslides
that occurred in artificial valley fills during
the 1995 Kobe earthquake further highlights
the need to avoid residential fills and opt for
more sustainable alternatives such as building
“contour line cities,” with houses distributed
along topographic contours to reduce the
cascading linkage between development and
landslides in hilly urban regions (85).
Repeated natural disturbances affecting eco-
system structure, Papua New Guinea. Con-
tinual natural disturbances (e.g., earthquakes,
volcanism, tectonic uplift, landslides) in the
mountains of Papua New Guinea have cre-
ated an ecosystem in a kind of “dynamic
equilibrium.” An estimated 8–16% of New
Guinea’s tropical forests are disturbed every
century by earthquakes and related landslides
(86). Earlier studies in a portion of this ter-
rain revealed that large single earthquakes in
1935 (M = 7.9) and 1970 (M = 7.0) denuded
8% and 25% of affected forested areas (130
and 60 km2), respectively (87, 88). An addi-
tional 3% of the New Guinea landscape is
disturbed by landslides not associated with
earthquakes—mostly initiated by the high
rainfall (2,500–6,000 mm·y?1) that exhibits
strong but spatially variable seasonal cycles.
Natural episodic disturbances maintain large
areas of successional forest that, in the ab-
sence of these disturbances, would even-
tually be replaced by other tree species (86).
Extraction of natural resources further exacer-
bates terrain instability and resultant forest
composition. Timber harvesting, mining, en-
ergy development, and associated infrastruc-
ture all affect the stability of steep slopes (40).
Because earthquake-initiated landslides are
more common on steep hillsides and ridge-
lines (40), these sites are where vegetation dis-
turbance is most prominent. Rainfall-initiated
landslides typicallyoccuronsteepslopes, aswell
as in concave depressions (hollows) where
shallow groundwater concentrates (40), but not
along ridgelines. The ecosystem resetting asso-
ciated with these different mechanisms and
topographic features, therefore, should be in-
cluded in sustainability assessments.
The juxtaposing forces and influences of
rapid tectonic uplift and denudation by mass
erosion and other surficial processes are
evident in the development of drainage
networks in this geologically youthful ter-
rain. The early phase of rapid tectonic uplift
creates a pre–steady-state evolution of to-
pography in Papua New Guinea that can be
characterized by the following sequences in
the Finisterre Mountains: (i) watershed ini-
tiation in isolated gorges in terrain with
subdued relief where drainages are created
by dissolution processes and tectonic up-
lift dominates erosion; (ii) watershed ex-
pansion where mass wasting (landslides
controlled by groundwater seepage) rap-
idly supplies sediment to streams, which
accelerates channel erosion, lowers valleys,
and steepens topography; (iii) tributary ex-
pansion by slope-clearing landslides along
valley sides; and (iv) stream entrenchment
due to runoff concentration and associated
fluvial incision of landslide scars and de-
posits (89). Each unique setting must be
recognized in sustainability assessments of
land use in this dynamic terrain, especially
in how management decisions affect stream
channel morphology, erosion, and sediment
transport. Treating responses to manage-
ment decisions similarly for these dif-
ferent geomorphic settings is fraught with
problems.
Summary
Ecosystems are impacted by natural and
anthropogenic stressors. Resilience in these
systems accommodates certain levels of
both stressor types and should be consid-
ered to properly frame ecosystem assess-
ments. A more difficult issue occurs when
stressors push systems to tipping points,
causing a regime shift. Whereas chronic
anthropogenic activities such as progressive
soil degradation, land-cover change, and air
pollution are often linked to tipping points
(25, 39), natural changes can also push
systems to their limits (16, 24). Recognizing
tipping points and implementing strategies
to avoid (in terms of anthropogenic stres-
sors) or cope (in the case of natural stres-
sors) is a challenge that requires thorough
understanding of ecosystem processes and
responses to stressors. Cumulative-effects
analysis can help separate effects of an-
thropogenic activities from those of natural
processes and is useful in sustainability
assessments (90).
The most difficult ecosystems to assess for
sustainability are those predisposed to epi-
sodic natural disasters—major earthquakes,
tsunami, large landslides, widespread wildfire,
and volcanic activity—that can reset entire
systems for long periods. Oftentimes, major
events initiate a cascade of linked disasters, as
in the case of the 2011 Great East Japan
Earthquake, where tsunami, fires, landslides,
fillslope collapses, radioactive releases, and
associated health effects occurred. Such dis-
asters are often devastating because lack of
warning inhibits response, and the infrequent
nature of these events precludes the in-
corporation of past episodes into contempo-
rary decision making (14, 37). Capturing the
probability of ecosystem resetting in sustain-
ability assessments is necessary, as evidenced
by recent disasters throughout Asia and
North America.
A paradigm shift is required for us to
embrace concepts of sustainability and ex-
plore the consequences of decision making
that affects human and ecosystem integrity.
Harmonizing environmental, economic, and
social opportunities for the benefit of present
and future generations creates an opportu-
nity to understand the influence of inherent
chemical, geophysical, and social attrib-
utes and stressors on human health and
ecological integrity. It is further recog-
nized that whereas underestimating the
impact of certain stressors and related
exposures may result in contamination or
adverse health effects, overestimating the
potential hazards could create an eco-
nomic burden on communities. Land-
management and regulatory agencies of-
ten rely on indicators of sustainability in
ecosystems (3, 91, 92), but it is important
to understand how anthropogenic and
natural ecosystem processes force changes
in system behavior as well as the goods
and services they provide (16, 24, 90).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This document has been re-
viewed in accordance with US Environmental Protec-
tion Agency policy and is approved for publication.
1 Goodland R (1995) The concept of environmental sustainability.
Annu Rev Ecol Syst 26:1–24.
2 Kates RW, Parris TM, Leiserowitz AA (2005) What is sustainable
development? Goals, indicators, values, and practice. Environment
47(3):8–21.
3 National Research Council (2011) Sustainability and the U.S. EPA
(Natl Acad Press, Washington, DC).
4 Spangenberg JH (2011) Sustainability science: A review, an
analysis and some empirical lessons. Environ Conserv 38(3):
275–287.
5 Kates RW, et al. (2001) Environment and development.
Sustainability science. Science 292(5517):641–642.
6 Turner BL II, et al. (2003) Illustrating the coupled human-
environment system for vulnerability analysis: Three case studies.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100(14):8080–8085.
7 Costanza R (2012) Ecosystem health and ecological engineering.
Ecol Eng 45:24–29.
8 Daily G, Ehrlich PR (1992) Population, sustainability, and Earth’s
carrying capacity. Bioscience 42(10):761–771.
9 Clark WC, Dickson NM (2003) Sustainability science: The
emerging research program. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100(14):
8059–8061.
10 Chapin FS III, et al. (2010) Ecosystem stewardship: Sustainability
strategies for a rapidly changing planet. Trends Ecol Evol 25(4):
241–249.
11 Holling CS (2001) Understanding the complexity of
economic, ecological, and social systems. Ecosystems (N Y)
4(5):390–405.
12 Ulanowicz RE, Goerner SJ, Lietaer B, Gomez R (2009) Quantifying
sustainability: Resilience, efficiency and the return of information
theory. Ecol Complex 6:27–36.
13 Thompson I (2011) Biodiversity, ecosystem thresholds, resilience
and forest degradation. Unasylva 62:25–30.
14 Folke C, et al. (2010) Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience,
adaptability and transformability. Ecol and Society 15(4):20.
15 Holling CS (1973) Resilience and stability of ecological systems.
Annu Rev Ecol Syst 4:1–23.
16 Scheffer M, Carpenter S, Foley JA, Folke C, Walker B (2001)
Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature 413(6856):591–596.
17 MacDonald GM (2010) Water, climate change, and sustainability
in the Southwest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(50):21256–21262.
18 Li Y, Yang ZF (2011) Quantifying the sustainability of water use
systems: Calculating the balance between network efficiency and
resilience. Ecol Model 222(10):1771–1780.
Sidle et al. PNAS | June 4, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 23 | 9207
PE
RS
PE
CT
IV
E
19 Gleeson T, et al. (2012) Towards sustainable groundwater use:
Setting long-term goals, backcasting, and managing adaptively.
Ground Water 50(1):19–26.
20 Peterson G, Allen CR, Holling CS (1998) Ecological resilience,
biodiversity, and scale. Ecosystems 1(1):6–18.
21 Frazier JG (1997) Sustainable development: Modern elixir or sack
dress? Environ Conserv 24(2):182–193.
22 Kay JJ, Regier HA, Boyle M, Francis G (1999) An ecosystem
approach for sustainability: Addressing the challenge of complexity.
Futures 31(7):721–742.
23 Lenton TM, et al. (2008) Tipping elements in the Earth’s climate
system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(6):1786–1793.
24 Barnosky AD, et al. (2012) Approaching a state shift in Earth’s
biosphere. Nature 486(7401):52–58.
25 Laurance WF, et al. (2011) The 10 Australian ecosystems most
vulnerable to tipping points. Biol Conserv 144:1472–1480.
26 Nepstad DC, Stickler CM, Filho BS, Merry F (2008) Interactions
among Amazon land use, forests and climate: Prospects for a near-
term forest tipping point. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363
(1498):1737–1746.
27 Dai L, Vorselen D, Korolev KS, Gore J (2012) Generic indicators
for loss of resilience before a tipping point leading to population
collapse. Science 336(6085):1175–1177.
28 Westley F, et al. (2011) Tipping toward sustainability: Emerging
pathways of transformation. Ambio 40(7):762–780.
29 Mimura N, Yasuhara K, Kawagoe S, Yokoki H, Kazama S
(2011) Damage from the Great East Japan Earthquake and
Tsunami—A quick report. Mitig Adapt Strategies Glob Change
16(7):803–818.
30 Lowe DR, et al. (1986) Lahars initiated by the 13 November
1985 eruption of Nevado del Ruiz, Colombia. Nature 324(6092):
51–53.
31 Hewitt K Natural dams and outburst floods of the Karakoram
Himalaya. Hydrological Aspects of Alpine and High Mountain Areas
(Wallingford, Oxon, UK), IAHS Publ. No. 138, 259–269.
32 Reimnitz E (1973) Effects in the Copper River Delta. The Great
Alaska Earthquake of 1964 (Natl Acad Sci, Washington, DC),
pp 290–302.
33 Close U, McCormick E (1922) Where the mountains walked. Natl
Geographic 41(5):445–464.
34 Cramer CH, Petersen MD, Cao T, Toppozada TR, Reichle M
(2000) A time-dependent probabilistic seismic-hazard model for
California. Bull Seismol Soc Am 90(1):1–21.
35 Gilles D, Young N, Schroeder H, Piotrowski J, Chang Y-J (2012)
Inundation mapping initiatives of the Iowa Flood Center: Statewide
coverage and detailed urban flooding analysis. Water 4(1):
85–106.
36 Dhakal AS, Sidle RC (2003) Long-term modelling of landslides for
different forest management practices. Earth Surf Process Landf
28(8):853–868.
37 Weick KE, Sutcliffe KM, Obstfeld D (2005) Organizing and the
process of sensemaking. Organ Sci 16(4):409–421.
38 Clark WC (2007) Sustainability science: A room of its own. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 104(6):1737–1738.
39 Steffen W, Crutzen J, McNeill JR (2007) The Anthropocene: Are
humans now overwhelming the great forces of Nature? Ambio 36(8):
614–621.
40 Sidle RC, Ochiai H (2006) Landslides: Processes, Prediction, and
Land Use (Am Geophys Union, Washington, DC), Water Resour
Monogr No 18.
41 Eisenbies MH, Aust WM, Burger JA, Adams MB (2007) Forest
operations, extreme flooding events, and considerations for
hydrologic modeling in the Appalachians—A review. For Ecol
Manage 242(2-3):77–98.
42 Catane SG, Abon CC, Saturay RM, Mendoza EPP, Futalan KM
(2012) Landslide-amplified flash floods—The June 2008 Panay Island
flooding, Philippines. Geomorphology 169-170:55–63.
43 Sidle RC, et al. (2006) Erosion processes in steep terrain—Truths,
myths, and uncertainties related to forest management in Southeast
Asia. For Ecol Manage 224(1-2):199–225.
44 Martínez ML, et al. (2009) Effects of land use change on
biodiversity and ecosystem services in tropical montane cloud forests
of Mexico. For Ecol Manage 258(9):1856–1863.
45 Foster WA, et al. (2011) Establishing the evidence base for
maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem function in the oil palm
landscapes of South East Asia. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
366(1582):3277–3291.
46 Miranda LM, et al. (2002) Policy concepts and applications. Inter-
Connections Between Human Health and Ecological Integrity, eds Di
Giulio RT, Benson WH (Soc Environ Toxicol Chem, Pensacola, FL),
pp 15–41.
47 Turner RK, Subak S, Adger WN (1996) Pressures, trends, and
impacts in coastal zones: Interactions between socioeconomic and
natural systems. Environ Manage 20(2):159–173.
48 Kirshen P, Merrill S, Slovinsky P, Richardson N (2012) Simplified
method for scenario-based risk assessment adaptation planning in
the coastal zone. Clim Change 113(3-4):919–931.
49 Wamsley TV, Cialone MA, Smith JM, Ebersole BA,
Grzegorzewski AS (2009) Influence of landscape restoration and
degradation on storm surge and waves in southern Louisiana. Nat
Hazards 51(1):207–224.
50 Coleman JM, Roberts HH, Stone GW (1998) Mississippi River
Delta: An overview. J Coast Res 14(3):698–716.
51 Leatherman SP (1988) Barrier Island Handbook (Univ of
Maryland, College Park, MD), Coastal Publication Series.
52 Osborne K, Dolman AM, Burgess SC, Johns KA (2011)
Disturbance and the dynamics of coral cover on the Great Barrier
Reef (1995–2009). PLoS One 6(3):e17516.
53 Criss RE, Shock EL (2001) Flood enhancement through flood
control. Geology 29(10):875–878.
54 Ogden JC, Davis SM, Barnes TK, Jacobs KJ, Gentile JH (2005)
Total system conceptual ecological model.Wetlands 25(4):955–979.
55 Committee on Environment and Natural Resources (2010)
Scientific Assessment of Hypoxia in U.S. Coastal Waters (Interagency
Working Group on Harmful Algal Blooms, Hypoxia, and Human
Health, Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology,
Washington, DC).
56 Chapman MG, Underwood AJ (2011) Evaluation of ecological
engineering of “armoured” shorelines to improve their value as
habitat. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 400(1-2):302–313.
57 Council on Environmental Quality (2010) Roadmap for Restoring
Ecosystem Resiliency and Sustainability (Louisiana-Mississippi Gulf
Coast Ecosystem Restoration Working Group, President’s Council on
Environmental Quality, Washington, DC).
58 Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Task Force (2011) Gulf of
Mexico Regional Ecosystem Restoration Strategy (Gulf Coast
Ecosystem Restoration Task Force).
59 Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority of Louisiana (2012)
Louisiana’s Comprehensive Master Plan for a Sustainable Coast
(Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority of Louisiana, Baton
Rouge, LA).
60 de Mutsert K, Cowan J, Jr. (2012) A before–after–control–impact
analysis of the effects of a Mississippi River freshwater diversion on
estuarine nekton in Louisiana, USA. Estuaries Coasts 35(5):
1237–1248.
61 Peterson CH, et al. (2011) A Once and Future Gulf of Mexico
Ecosystem: Restoration Recommendations of an Expert Working
Group (Pew Environ Group, Washington, DC).
62 Allison MA, Meselhe EA (2010) The use of large water and
sediment diversions in the lower Mississippi River (Louisiana) for
coastal restoration. J Hydrol 387:346–360.
63 Morton RA, Tilling G, Ferina NF (2003) Causes of hot-spot wetland
loss in the Mississippi delta plain. Environ Geosci 10(2):71–80.
64 Morton RA, Buster NA, Krohn MD (2002) Subsurface controls
on historical subsidence rates and associated wetland loss in
southcentral Louisiana. Trans Gulf Coast Assoc Geol Soc
52:767–778.
65 Morton RA, Bernier JC (2010) Recent subsidence-rate reductions
in the Mississippi Delta and their geologic implications. J Coast Res 26
(3):555–561.
66 Day JW, et al. (2009) The impacts of pulsed reintroduction of
river water on a Mississippi delta coastal basin. J Coast Res 54(Spec
Issue):225–243.
67 Stagg CL, Mendelssohn IA (2010) Restoring ecological function
to a submerged salt marsh. Restor Ecol 18(Suppl 1):10–17.
68 Das A, et al. (2012) Impacts of Mississippi River diversions on
salinity gradients in a deltaic Louisiana estuary: Ecological and
management implications. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 111:17–26.
69 Day JW, et al. (2011) Vegetation death and rapid loss of surface
elevation in two contrasting Mississippi delta salt marshes: The role of
sedimentation, autocompaction and sea-level rise. Ecol Eng 37(2):
229–240.
70 Blum MD, Roberts HH (2009) Drowning of the Mississippi Delta
due to insufficient sediment supply and global sea-level rise. Nat
Geosci 2(7):488–491.
71 Walker S, Dausman A, Lavoie D, eds (2012) Gulf of Mexico
Ecosystem Science Assessment and Needs (Gulf Coast Ecosystem
Restoration Task Force Science Coordination Team).
72 Martin J, et al. (2011) Structured decision making as a proactive
approach to dealing with sea level rise in Florida. Clim Change
107:185–202.
73 Sidle RC, Ziegler AD (2012) The dilemma of mountain roads. Nat
Geosci 5(7):437–438.
74 Krongkaew M (2004) The development of the Greater Mekong
Subregion (GMS): Real promise or false hope? J Asian Econ 15(5):
977–998.
75 Nyaupane GP, Morais DB, Dowler L (2006) The role of
community involvement and number/type of visitors on tourism
impacts: A controlled comparison of Annapurna, Nepal and
northwest Yunnan, China. Tour Manage 27(6):1373–1385.
76 Sidle RC, Furuichi T, Kono Y (2011) Unprecedented rates of
landslide and surface erosion along a newly constructed road in
Yunnan, China. Nat Hazards 57:313–326.
77 Maeda M, Al-Washali HA, Takahashi K, Suzuki K (2012)
Damage to reinforced concrete school buildings in Miyagi after the
2011 Great East Japan Earthquake. Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Engineering Lessons Learned from the 2011 Great East
Japan Earthquake (Kenchiku-Kaikan, Tokyo), pp 1120–1131.
78 Yasunari TJ, et al. (2011) Cesium-137 deposition and
contamination of Japanese soils due to the Fukushima nuclear
accident. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(49):19530–19534.
79 Akahane K, et al. (2012) The Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant
accident and exposures in the environment. Environmentalist
32:136–143.
80 Shiraki Y, Kita N, Yamada Y (2012) Distribution and reduction of
fallout radioactive caesium in tea plants grown in Kanagawa
Prefecture. Radioisotopes 61(5):261–265.
81 Chang ET, Chao BF (2011) Co-seismic surface deformation of the
2011 off the Pacific coast to Tohoku Earthquake: Spatio-temporal
EOF analysis of GPS data. Earth Planets Sci 63(7):649–654.
82 Hayasaka D, et al. (2012) Floristic variation of beach vegetation
caused by the 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami in northern Tohoku, Japan.
Ecol Eng 44:227–232.
83 Kamai T (2013) Landslides in urban residential slopes induced
by the 2011 off the Pacific coast of Tohoku earthquake. Disaster
Prevention Research Institute Series Vol. 1 Studies on the 2011 Off
the Pacific Coast of Tohoku Earthquake (Springer, Berlin), in press.
84 Tohoku University Institute of Geology and Paleontology (1979)
Phenomena and disasters associated with the Miyagi-ken-Oki
earthquake of 1978 in the east-central part of northeast Honshu,
Japan. Inst Geol Paleontol Contrib 80:1–96.
85 Kamai T (1995) Landslides in the Hanshin urban region caused by
the 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu Earthquake, Japan. Landslide News
9:12–13.
86 Garwood NC, Janos DP, Brokaw N (1979) Earthquake-caused
landslides: A major disturbance to tropical forests. Science
205(4410):997–999.
87 Simonett DS (1967) Landslide disturbance in the Bewani and
Torricelli Mountains, New Guinea. Landform Studies from Australia
and New Guinea, eds Jennings JN, Mabutt A (Australian Natl Univ
Press, Canberra, Australia), pp 64–84.
88 Pain CF (1972) Characteristics and geomorphic effects of
earthquake-initiated landslides in the Adelbert Range, Papua New
Guinea. Eng Geol 6(4):261–274.
89 Hovius N, Stark CP, Tutton MA, Abbott LD (1998) Landslide-
driven drainage network evolution in a pre-steady-state mountain
belt: Finisterre Mountains, Papua New Guinea. Geology
26:1071–1074.
90 Sidle RC, Hornbeck JW (1991) Cumulative effects: A broader
approach to water quality research. J Soil Water Conserv
46:268–271.
91 Burger J (2006) Bioindicators: Types, development, and use in
ecological assessment and research. Environ Bioindicators 1(1):22–39.
92 Walmsley JJ (2002) Framework for measuring sustainable
development in catchment systems. Environ Manage 29(2):195–206.
9208 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1302328110 Sidle et al.
