LETTER Utilization of heterogeneous catalysts is considered Renewable fuel has greatly attracted the attention of as an important factor for the commercial production researchers to be used instead of conventional diesel of biodiesel ( ). Due to a variety of advantages such to decrease environmental pollutions and the relative as less corrosion, convenient handling and separation, negative e ects ( ). Biodiesel as a biofuel consists of reusability and less amount of toxic wastes, hetero- mono alkyl esters which are attained by trans-esteri ca- geneous catalysts are considered as e cient alternatives tion of animal fat or plant oil with alcohols of short chain to homogeneous catalyst ( ). Production of zeolite as a such as ethanol or methanol ( ). Methanolysis or trans- catalyst has increasingly improved in recent years ( ). In esteri cation is considered as the best technique for general, zeolites are based on the structure of three- reducing viscosity of plant oils ( ). However, waste oil dimensional network of an aluminum and silicon tetra- is considerably cheaper than pure re ned vegetable hedral as TO (T = Co, Fe, Si, B, Al, Ge, P) linked by oils; it is noteworthy that disposal of waste materials shared oxygen atoms ( ). The positive charge of alumi- like waste cooking may cause health-related risks and num is lower than silicon s positive charge. Conse- the environmental risks ( ). Waste oil, as a plentiful quently, the frame has generally a net negative charge and sustainable feedstock, can be used for biodiesel pro- balanced by exchangeable (e.g. Mg , Na , C a and duction ( ), but the extensive pretreatments a ect its K ). As a result, this negative surface charge gives economic viability since the economic aspects of biodie- zeolite an excellent a nity for cationic ions ( ). A sel production are of considerable importance for its sus- rich variety of zeolite types have been considered and tainable preparation ( ). used for waste oils trans-esteri cation including KOH/ bentonite zeolite ( ), NaOH/bentonite ( ), natural suspended matter in the WSO, it was rst ltered and zeolite from Pacitan Indonesia ( ), zeolite tu ( ), then, to reduce the acid value, it went through a 2 h KOH/ZSM5 zeolite ( ), clinoptilolite zeolite ( ), etc. reaction with sulfuric acid in 1 wt.%. To determine the High silica zeolite beta (HSZB) is one of the most acid value, the product was titrated. WSO with an acid widely used porous materials because of large cages value of 0.38 mg g matching with a free fatty and pores, three-dimensional channel networks and acid (FFA) level of 0.19% and initial saponi cation high Si/Al ratio ( ). The main advantage of using het- value of 149.58 mg m g was used. erogeneous catalyst is minimizing the problems associ- Using a Karl Fischer titration method, the amount of ated with homogeneous catalyst which are recycling water in waste oil was measured to be 0.01% (w/w). and regeneration, catalyst separation and soap for- Waste oil molecular weight was 863.48 g m ol , mation ( ). As a consequence, the extensive measured based on saponi cation value. Equations (1) product puri cation steps and disposal problems are and (2) were used to calculate the acid value and FFA, eliminated to o er an economical pathway for pro- respectively ( ). The oil was taken in a conical ask duction of biodiesel. and dissolved in 50 mL of 2-propanol by gradually Th e pre s ent stu dy ai ms at de vel opi n g a new h et ero - heating it. Using phenolphthalein as indicator, the ge n eou s cat al ys t fro m HS ZB fo r fat ty aci d m et h yl es ter obtained solution was titrated against 0.1 N KOH until (F A M E ) pro duc ti on fr om was te sun ow er oil (WS O) . a slight pink color was seen. Based on Equation (2), the T he het ero ge n eou s ze oli te beta cat aly st is eco nom ica lly FFA content is calculated as half of acid value. fe as ib le , te ch nica lly app li cab le an d envi ro nme nta lly 56 fr ien dly wit h a l owes t le vel of co mp le xi ty sy ste m in pre - Acid value , (1) pa ri ng an d usi ng the pro duc t. In thi s res ea rc h, the het - ero ge neo us al kal ine ze oli te be ta cat al ys t w a s loa de d acid value FFA , (2) an d pre pare d to pro du ce FA ME thr o ugh th e tran s-e ste r- 2 i cat ion r eac tio n res ul te d fro m re ux . Cat al ys t pro pe r- where represents normality titrant (KOH), stands for ti es ha ve be en an aly ze d by s can n ing el ec tro n consumed volume titrant (mL), 56 is the equivalent mi cr osc opy (SE M) , ene r gy- di spe rsi v e X-r ay (E DX) , weight of KOH and is the weight of fatty acid (g). F our ie r tran sfor m inf ra red (F T- IR), Bru n aue r Em met t Potassium hydroxide (KOH) (99%), tetrahydrofuran T el le r (B ET) an d X- ray di r act ion (X RD) an al ys es. In th is (THF) ((CH ) CH O) ( 99.8%), sodium sulfate (Na SO ) r ese arc h, th e use d cat al ys t w as pre pa red from imp reg - ( 99%), hydrogen peroxide (H O ) (35%), sulfuric acid n ati on o f HS ZB by KOH sol uti on . T he ch ar act eri sti cs o f (H SO ) (95 97%) and methanol (CH OH) (99.5%) were th e te xtu re of thi s cat al ys t w as exa min ed fo r und er- supplied by Merck Company (Germany). Oven Pars 120 s tan din g it s str uc tur e, co n sid eri ng act iv e s it es in the cat - KET (Iran) and heater magnetic stirrers Heidolph al ys t, an d its sus ta ina bili ty in the stu dy to pro vid e pro pe r (Germany) were used in this research. co n diti o ns for tr an s-es te ri ca tio n rea cti o n o f the WS O usi n g the adv an tage s of the cat al ys t. The pre pa red ze o li te be ta cat al ys ts wer e use d for tra ns -es ter i cat ion o f WS O to bi odi ese l pro du ct ion. Al so par ame ter s li ke cat al ys t wei ght pe rc ent , al co ho l:o il mo la r ra tio , te m p- FT-IR spectra (Nicolet 5700) were measured in the 400 era tu re, di ere nt pe rcen tage s o f co -so lv ent an d ti m e 4000 cm range. All spectra were obtained with a resol- w ere te ste d. A t the end , res tor ing th e int end ed cat al ys t ution of 4 cm and accumulation of 64 scans. The ne h as be en sur v eye d in te rm s of the obt ain ed o ptim iz ed powder solid substances were mixed with potassium r ati os . bromide (KBr) and pressed. The samples XRD were measured with a Philips X pert PRO equipped with a Cu K radiation (wavelength = 0.154187 nm) at the scan speed of 0.03° s (2 = 5 65°). SEM on a Cam Scan apparatus with the applied voltage of 20 kV was used to observe the morphology of the samples. To HSZB was obtained from Delta Factory (Iran). For the determine the composition of the compounds, EDX trans-esteri cation, WSO was collected from the central (Flash & Bruker 6120) data were collected. BELMax restaurant of a big hospital in Tehran. The collected (BEL, Japan) with nitrogen adsorption gas at 77 K and waste oil has been pretreated before doing work exper- a pressure 1 10 was used to carry out iment. The method used by Tanawannapong et al. was speci c surface area (BET) of the prepared samples applied to use WSO ( ). To remove ne particles and (0.5 g powder). The gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC MS) was equipped with ame ioniz- organic impurities, HSZB was treated with H O 30% sol- ation detector (FID) detector and biodiesel column ution. Then, H O solution was disappeared by hot water model of WAXCP 9080 with an internal diameter of several times. In the next stage, to get rid of moisture 0.25 mm and 30 m length. The carrier gas was helium. from HSZB, the puri ed HSZB was dried in an oven at The column temperature was 60°C at the beginning, 120°C for 10 h. Finally, a hammer w as used to pulverize constant for 2 m in, reaching 210° with a slope of the dried zeolite. The conventional process of hydrother- 10° min and immediately reached 230°C with a slope mal treatment with KOH was adopted for the synthesis of 5° min and kept for 10 min at the nal temperature. of potassic HSZB. First, 7.5 g of the HSZB sample was incorporated in an alkaline solution (15 g of KOH + 100 mL distilled water) with HSZB/KOH ratio 1:2, under stirring (300 rpm) at a reaction temperature of 75°C for Considering the loss of catalytic activity caused by poi- 2 h. The resulting mixture was dried for two days at soning, the like phenomenon is an important aspect room temperature. After that, the product obtained in when using heterogeneous catalysts. It is mostly the rst stage reacted with potassic solution of 5 M approved that when contacting with air, heterogeneous KOH at 55°C, with a reaction time of 15 h, and then cal- catalysts may lose their activity due to adsorption of CO cined for 4 h at 500°C ( Figure 1 ). Di erent weight and H O onto the solid surface ( ). To remove the percent of the catalyst based on the oil weight percent (0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5) and di erent molar ratio of metha- glycerin was separated from the biodiesel within 2 h, nol:oil (3:1, 6:1, 9:1 and 12:1) were added to the oil. but di erent periods of time were allocated to complete Di erent weight percent of the co-solvent (THF) based the process. The temperature of the re ux system is on the methanol weight percent (5, 10, 15, 20 and 25) usually determined based on alcohol boiling point were used to homogenize the reaction mixture. After- which causes an increase in the nal conversion wards, the solution went under reaction at 55°C temp- percent. In Figure 2 , in a 250 mL round bottom ask of erature with 300 rpm stirring speed. In the experiment, re ux system, the waste oil and catalyst with extra alcohol were added. After the completion of the trans- Furthermore, two peaks in the (2 ) region = 7° (101) esteri cation reaction, the two glycerol and biodiesel and 22° (302), according to the JCPDS 48-0038 cards phases were separated and the obtained solution was and literature data, are attributed to the HSZB phase translocated in the separatory funnel and FAME phase. ( ). Kusuma et al. showed that the new phase of potass- In the nal phase, crude biodiesel should be washed ium oxide is emerged at 2 = 31°, 39°, 51°, 55° and 62° with warm distilled water at 60°C to eliminate impurities ( ). The K O formation strongly indicated that the and pollutants which may include the remained catalyst, KOH was well distributed on the surface or structure of the non-reacted alcohol, glycerol, FFAs or soap. To get HSZB. This is in association with XRD analysis where rid of the soap from the mixture with high soap for- the structure of zeolite is retained even after treatment mation, stearic acid (0.1%) was added to the at alkali ( ). However, the peak s intensity is low due to bottom ask to neutralize and eliminate all formed high dispersion of K O particles. In Figure 3 (c), K O was soap and unreacted K . The reaction mixture is washed used in trans-esteri cation and washed with alcohol with distilled water until it becomes fully clear. and n-hexane after the process which resulted in the Washing was done three times in this phase. The extra decrease of K O in the used catalyst structure in the remained alcohol in this phase should be completely third cycle. separated with evaporation or distillation. The washed Figure 4 indicates SEM images of zeolite (a), the pre- FAME is then dried over sodium sulfate. The following pared catalyst (b) and the used catalyst (c) in the trans- formula was used to calculate biodiesel e ciency ( ): esteri cation process. Treating the structure of HSZB weight of the FAME with KOH agglomerates the pores in zeolite causing Yield (%) 100% (3) the surface of the prepared catalyst seem more inte- weight of WSO grated that increases the resistance and sustainability of the catalyst. The calcination converts KOH to K O as active sites in pores and cages of zeolite ( ). Alkali metal oxides can enhance the number of basic sites of the zeolite and the basic strength ( ). This increase in Figure 3 (a,b) displays the XRD used for the inner surface percentage of conversion is attributed to the higher pot- and the structure, solid and crystalline phase of raw assium oxide active sites content in the synthesized cat- Zeolite Beta and modi ed catalyst. Some species of alyst ( ). Figure 5 (b,c) indicates a representative EDX of K O m ay be formed on the zeolite particles external K on the catalyst and used catalyst. The amount of K structure that shows partial distortion of the structure element enhanced with the KOH treatment, con rming of zeolite due to the occurrence of impregnation step the existence of K element on HSZB, which is considered inside the zeolite crystallites. If this happens, some a good stability of catalyst since a low amount of K species of K O are also formed in the intracrystalline content was leached during three trans-esteri cation volume or zeolite structure upper cages ( ). The cycles. zeolite peaks intensity decreases with an increase of K BET sorptometer (auto absorb from quantachrome) that shows an insigni cant loss of crystallinity ( ). was used to specify the pore volume and speci c struc- Regarding that the existing water in zeolite was ture area of zeolite and catalyst. HSZB having a surface removed in the calcination process, KOH was converted area and high pore volume, as a result of hydrothermal to K O, as shown in the XRD pattern ( ). treatment during catalyst synthesis decreases particle volume of the zeolite beta pores which can be ascribed to blockage of most micropores by K O. Accordingly, more free mesopores will be accessible, enhancing pores average diameter. The total surface area of HSZB was 465.2 m g and the total pore volume was 0.2142 cm g . However, the BET surface area and total tore volume values of the catalyst were found to be very low, 34.67 m g and 0.0494 m g , respect- ively, since potassium compounds covered zeolite surface and pores during the impregnation step and a substantial decrease of the pore volume was shown after the impregnation process. In Figure 6 (a), 3432 cm shows the sharp band of hydrogen bonded OH, water stretching vibration at 3620 cm and the H O bending vibration at 1635 cm . The band at 3425 cm is related to the O H stretching and 1640 cm is related to bending of adsorbed water. The peak 1348 cm in FT-IR related to catalyst shows O H deformation vibration of CH OH. The deformation band Si O Si has a sharp peak at 460 cm . However, the Si O exists in the prepared zeolite beta; Al OH were observed as a result of zeolite mixing with KOH solution. The SiO and AlO bands at 1021 and 703 cm display the asymmetric and sym- metric stretching vibrations of the zeolite structure. In HSZB, the wavenumbers in 750 820 cm signify the O M O (M = Al, Si) symmetric stretching vibration. In Figure 6 (b), the rise in the OH groups is a common phenomenon that is associated with the modi cation of alkaline for the alkaline environments role in the surface of zeolite. A new band at 2874 cm was detected that is attributed to hydroxyl groups formed during the modi cation of alkaline of zeolite precursor by K O. The region of vibrational band at 821 cm shows the stretching vibrations of K O group ( ). Figure 6 (c) shows that 675 cm is related to O Al O symmetric stretching. The rst two peaks from 721 and 880 cm show the used catalyst s impurities. The peak at 1082 cm shows asymmetric stretching of Si O Si and the peak at 1061 cm was the carbonate species characteristic peak. In Figure 6 (c), the peaks at 3651 and 3413 cm were attributed to OH stretching of Si(OH)Al and the bending vibration of hydroxyl groups of absorbed H O at 1644 cm ( ). After the conversion reactions, the FT-IR spectrum of the used catalyst displayed the main groups with noticeable size. However, total pore volume and catalyst surface changes in their positions and intensities as well as the area have reduced intensely after a blockage of zeolite appearance of other new bands. The C H stretching of surface by K O impregnation. Pore diameter average CH appeared at 2927 cm that is assigned to the value, on the other hand, has augmented after the methyl or/and methylene groups of methyl esters process due to zeolite desilication and formation of adsorbed by the catalyst particles. Furthermore, the mesopore. Also, catalyst impregnation by K O increases presence of C=O was established by the observation of the average pore diameter in spite of the reduced the band at 1765 cm ( ). Figure 7 indicates the e ect of alcohol on biodiesel consequently to prevent methanol reaction with the cat- e ciency within a range of 3:1 12:1. Increasing metha- alyst. Su cient amount of alcohol can enhance the per- nol more than the optimized amount does not formance of the trans-esteri cation reaction towards the enhance the reaction which is attributed to the fact forward direction and increase the miscibility between that glycerol will be solved partly in the excess methanol the reactant phases ( ). However, excessive alcohol has four reversible e ects including the deactivation of catalyst, dilution of the present mixture and the associ- ated changes, the possible dissolution of glycerol bypro- ducts and the associated orientation of the reaction to the reversible direction, and the expected changes in the alcohol polar groups which convert the alcohol mol- ecules to be emulsi er centers ( ). FAME yield of 96.5% was obtained in the presence of alcohol:oil molar ratio of 9:1, 2 w t.% HSZB, co-solvent amount of 20 wt.%. Since methanol was absorbed by HSZB, the optimal metha- nol:oil molar ratio was higher than 6:1 which is a com- monly agreed optimal alcohol:oil ratio in the traditional heterogeneous base catalyzed trans- esteri cation. Figure 8 shows the e ect of zeolite beta concen- tration (wt.%) in the trans-esteri cation reaction within the range of 0.5 2.5 wt.% of catalyst to weight percent of WSO. The conversion reaction has increased from 0.5 to 2 w t.% by the catalyst loading. Figure 8 shows that when catalysis dosage goes more than 2 wt.%, FAME reduces. Optimization of catalyst amount is an important issue in reaching the highest production range of 25 65°C was considered. The higher the temp- percent since using excessive catalyst causes saponi ca- erature, the lower the viscosity will be to intensify the tion of the mixture and formation of gelatinous sub- trans-esteri cation process. High temperature facilitates stance leading to extreme decline of the trans- the mass transfer between oil and alcohol molecules and esteri cation process. Previous studies and the present consequently increases FAME conversion. It is note- research showed that trans-esteri cation occurs with worthy that in Figure 9 , the reaction temperature K O catalytic activity and using zeolite, without K O as should be a little lower than alcohol boiling point to a base catalyst does not lead to trans-esteri cation prevent alcohol evaporation. Because of this, 60°C ( ). showed the highest percent of FAME conversion. Temperature is one of the most contributing factors Addition of a co-solvent to the trans-esteri cation in trans-esteri cation yield. In Figure 9 , the temperature reaction makes methanol and waste oil phase mutually miscible ( ). Miscibility of the phases increases the reac- tion rate due to disappearance of mass transfer resist- ance between the phases of oil and alcohol ( ). Figure 10 shows that for this study, the optimum co- solvent to weight percent (wt.%) of m ethanol ratio is 20 wt.% producing 96.5% biodiesel yield. It can be con- cluded that reaction of trans-esteri cation in the pres- ence of co-solvent takes less time and the purpose of using co-solvent is to reduce energy consumption and time of reaction. As shown in Figure 10 , in the absence of co-solvent, the percentage of conversion reduces to 71.5% in the xed 4 h ( = 60°C, 300 rpm, m ethanol: waste oil molar ratio 9:1, 2 wt.% catalyst). Further increase in the co-solvent ratio lowered the content of FAME probably as a result of the dilution of the reac- tants. With 25 wt.% of the co-solvent, WSO concen- tration decreased and consequently reactions decreased ( ). Restoring and reusing catalyst is one of the greatest advantages of heterogeneous catalysts ( ). The catalyst was separated after nalizing and reaching the highest e ciency washed with methanol and n-hexane. This Figure 12(a) shows the characterization properties of washing allows catalyst s active sites to get rid of mol- the layered structure of catalyst and properties of ion ecules which poison these sites. The reduction in conver- exchange. The structure of the catalyst is mainly com- sion percent can be caused by organics deposition posed of an octahedral sheet which is placed between inside the molecular sieve which results in active sites two tetrahedron sheets ( ). This catalyst has consider- decline and active ingredient leaching. At the third able advantages including a structure with many cages run, the zeolite beta deactivates to a certain degree and pores, high ion exchange and a wide surface area and conversion percent decreases to 66.3% which is caused by high porosity. In addition, the activation of caused by leaching of active sites of catalysts structure alkaline on the sur cial siloxane groups leads to and obstruction of the active sites during the trans-ester- hydration of the HSZB sheets. Also, the activation of i cation process ( Figure 11 ). HSZB by alkaline treatment highly a ected the crystal structure of the catalyst. The sharing of the silica tetrahe- dron structures causes the formation of active sites with cages and pores. The active sites act as traps for K O in the activation process of the catalyst surface. Generally, K O can be placed within the catalyst structure by partial replacement of ions of aluminum and silicon and as trapped within the interlayer molecules of H O. In the presence of water, K O can convert into KOH where K converts into active sites for the trans-esteri - cation reaction through blocking the pore openings on the zeolite surface ( ). Figure 12(b) displays the trans-esteri cation reaction mechanism for biodiesel production using HSZB treated with KOH. In the rst step of reaction, CH O ion is formed from the reaction between the active site of K O with methanol. This CH O ion is a strong base which has high catalytic activity in the trans-esteri ca- tion reaction ( ). In the second step, the reactive CH O ion attacks the carbonyl carbon atom of WSO to form tetrahedral intermediate. Further rearrangement of tetrahedral intermediate produced one methyl ester Viscosity is an important factor in biodiesel quality so that biodiesel fuel uidity is directly in uenced by its vis- cosity increase. Injector performance is a ected by vis- cosity. The lower the viscosity, the better the pumping, atomization, and ner droplets achievement. The minimum range of ash point is a necessary condition for handling and fuel safety. Flash point which is very important in preventing liquid explosion and ring hazards should be in the speci ed standard range. As shown in Table 2 , the produced biodiesel ash pint is 150°C. Therefore, it can be concluded that this biodiesel is safe for handling and storage for some period of time. The cetane number of the obtained biodiesel was 56°C which is a little beyond the standard limit. The ignition quality of diesel fuels and the combustion quality of diesel fuel during compression ignition depend on cetane number. Table 3 shows the comparison of the results of this research with other recent reports of articles on using molecule and diglyceride anion. In the third step, digly- zeolite as a heterogeneous catalyst in raw materials ceride molecule reconstruction began with the reaction trans-esteri cation. It is seen that alkaline catalyst of with H from the catalyst. In step 4, the diglyceride anion HSZB is a good alternative in methanolysis of WSO may also react with methanol and generate reactive aiming at production of biodiesel. CH O ion. The catalytic reaction was then followed by the reaction between diglyceride and other CH O ion to produce monoglyceride molecule and one methyl ester molecule. Finally, CH O ion attacked carbonyl The purpose of this work was to develop an applicable carbon atom of monoglyceride to produce one methyl solid catalytic system from HSZB for renewable diesel ester molecule and one glycerol molecule. production from WSO currently attracting increasing Table 1 shows GC MS of FAME with methyl stearate, attention as an inexpensive feedstock for production methyl palmitate, and methyl oleate as main products. of FAME. The suggested catalyst in this study was The physical and chemical properties of the produced made from impregnation of HSZB with KOH solution biodiesel using HSZB including kinematic pour point, which was converted to K O during the calcination cetane number, ash point, density and viscosity were process. K O as the active catalyst factor has been scat- determined by standard analysis as shown in Table 2 . tered in the structure pores and surface fractures of HSZB. Proper translocation of K O in these sites brings about catalyst stability for reusing. Moreover, the inter- action of methanol:waste oil molar ratio and the amount of modi ed zeolite beta through K O and THF as a co-solvent amount were found to have signi cant e ects on conversion of FAME. Addition of a co- solvent to the trans-esteri cation reaction makes metha- nol and waste oil phase mutually miscible. The maximum renewable fuel conversion obtained in 4 h reaction time at a temperature of 60°C, co-solvent amount of 20 wt.%, m ethanol:waste oil molar ratio of 9:1, 2 w t.% catalyst and stirring speed of 300 rpm.