





















String pdfName="IEEE-2020-Adaptive Fuzzy Finite-Time Tracking";   // the subtitle is not correct because there are many fomulars.




(unresolved, blocking. it is because of the wrong extract . for example, 
"and outer radii of 0.5m and 2 m respectively 121.  gas in thc main TPC volume. Thc anode high-voltage system ",
the 121 is [2].
crossing block rows in IEEE-2000-Hardware Controls for the STAR Experiment at RHIC




cancelled
row with diffent upper/lower





blockformat adds left






old format not work
ALA-Past is Prologue



(unresolved, blocking, the body font size are different after ocr)
old format not work.
abstract and title worked but contents no
Spagna-1998-Dyslexia marker variables(AC2)



Done.
no title,no abstract
Archaeology-2020Digital Platforms and the Nature


SUBTITLE ISSUE
"4. SDN-based reactive defense" misses because the following "4.1. Threat detection based on statistics" is body format"
Elsevier-2021-Towards security automation in Software Defined
4.1. Threat detection based on statistics


Done
pageheader need to be the same as footer


Done
SUBTITLE ISSUE
CellularPhysiology-2020-Preferential Killing of Tetraploid Colon


DONE:
wiley-early 
1. no page footer cause missing the last row  ("SES measure (McDade et al., 2019). Separate variables were created")
2. 2.3 missing because the following body is not correct
3. block "Kessler, & Shaver, ..." row is long crossing columns


Done
some subtitles are not correct
Wiley-Early life stress and HPA axis


The following is the list of the articles by the Provost Spagna. The articles were all accessibility converted. But they are not extracted correctly.
Spagna-*.pdf




- JSTOR: if the 1st page has "jstor.org", skip the 1st page, start from the 2nd page.
- Rapid ILL: If the 1st page has " LENDER ", skip the 1st page, start from the 2nd page.


done
But the output font is still very small. I have to enlarge it to 170 % before I can read it.



请看看这文章。是不是可fix.
IEEE-2000-Hardware Controls for the STAR Experiment at RHIC.pdf


Done
This article has only one sentence extracted.
CellularPhysiology-2020-Preferential Killing of Tetraploid Colon.pdf



Elsevier-2021-Using ontologies to enhance human
done:
This Elsevier article does not extracted. It gives a blank page. But other Elsevier articles got extracted.
but bad output:
end if end for end while Trepan stops

done
- Sentence should stop at ". " But now I found that the Tool capture stops at "."
Example: 4.0%: sentence takes "4." as the end of the sentence.
Oasis-2018-Drug use among youth and adults


worked for column but minor issue that the paragraph "It is well known that dental pulp tissue " is recognized as body
it is because of the column not aligned
ScientificReports-2019-Dental pulp cell-derived powerful inducer
ScientificReports-2017-Detection of American Football Head

done
wrong subtitle:
ScientificReports-2022-Cost-efective fltering of unreliable

done
The journal title is bigger than the article title (ScientifiReports):
If the first page of the article has “www.nature.com/scientificreports . skip the 1sr title (journal title), capture the 2nd title (article title).

done:
The two articles loaded strangely:
- Title: 2020-Clinic-Eectof oral -- loaded with a blank page , looks good except the number of sentence is really high
- Title: 2020-review-The Science Behind -- loaded page with "HTTP 404 not found

 
done
Pull Wrong title issue:
If the beginning of the article has “CITATION ”, skip the 1st page. Start from the 2nd page   
psy*

The journal title is bigger than the article title (ScientifiReports):
If the first page of the article has “www.nature.com/scientificreports . skip the 1sr title (journal title), capture the 2nd title (article title).

done
Journal title is bigger than article title and & appears first:
If there is “elsevier.com”, skip the 1st title (which is the journal title), and capture the 2nd title (which is the article title.

done
Journal title is bigger than the article title:
When the first page has “thegreenjournal.com”, skip the 1st title (which is the journal title), and capture the 2nd title (which is the article title).



New suggests and issues found:

Enable PDF article load from cloud drives, like Google Drive
Output PDF opened in a new window
A button to go back to the Upload page
If a subheading has a number in front, the subheading is not captured: such as I.Introduction; or 1. Introduction
Note: Elsevier publications usually have journal names as the section headings. This kind of article does not capture well. Wrong title is captured.
Note: Springer journals do not load well.

Starting from 3/2022, list of of issues which cannot be fixed for now:
(Could not be fixed for now) Omit the letter "fi" , example:  confident ---> con dent; find ---> nd  https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Rj9SLKIL5CYmwILTVx7r6kFX5RXoh5Aw

(Could not be fixed for now) Subheadings did not get captured: if subheading has not a space line under to separate the subheading from the text body, the subheading could not be captured.  
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1_oCj3CSH1IDiNoYlx9uSXFl2CIF_JYD4

(Could not be fixed for now)Capture wrong article title: if the article has a journal section title, the Tool would capture the journal section heading as the article title; https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Cp3u2BnCNsU1dGgEfM0USJTuucGLut0x 





=====================
before 20220428

APS-Evidence for CP violation in B.pdf  
issue, subtitle
1. many math signs including up and down sign togeter.   K0S.
2. author list looks like text
3 rows close


AMS-PACMAN RENORMALIZATION_content     subtitle   
issue remaining, sent
1. error of font not found when extract. INTRODUCTION became Introduction
2. too many formulars messing up
(3) missing "structure is not very common due to the lack o"

ALA-Past is Prologue  interesting title
big letter



AIP-Magnetic fields for modulating the nervous system_content
curse border
big letter
spread letters
rows very close
missing subtitle



acs-A Review on Perovskite-Type LaFeO3_content


Medline-Beneficial Effects of Principal Polyphenols from Green Tea : 
1. negative index, 2. many short blocks which confuse columns, 3. number undefined rows/chars/blocks is more than those of text
resolved.


AMS-1991-GEODESIC FLOWS, INTERVAL MAPS,
fixed issue: not able to extract any character
have to disable colored block to make it work. otherwise, hangs at getting image.


No Headings- Moisture assisted perovskite film
solved issue: no obvious abstract



AIP-Magnetic fields for modulating the nervous system
solved
columns not aligned
big letter
narrow split
need to change the vgap to be 1.0f


Library&Archive-Review Essay-Instruction and Archives  - not resolved
- strange on the second page
- title charfont no bold feature
-upleftbigfont
- colum width not consistent between pages

Archaeology-1896 CRETAN EXPEDITION_content -- not resolved 
- no exit
- no exit


Artforum-1995 Painting for Profit and Pleasure_content 
-- not resolved, partly article

AMS-1991-GEODESIC FLOWS, INTERVAL MAPS,
- different body font size


Ad in front-Library-driven approach for fast implementation
- first page is empty

Wiley-Early life stress and HPA axis
- Pennington, 2017; Engert, Efanov, Dedovic, Dagher, & is separated if 2.5. changed to float _CharHGapRatio=3.5f;

https://github.com/mkl-public/testarea-pdfbox2/tree/d44c6283c4618a026372ac6186a08861c988482f    extract only visible chars