Title:
PACMAN RENORMALIZATION
AND SELF-SIMILARITY OF THE MANDELBROT SET
NEAR SIEGEL PARAMETERS

Abstract:
. In the 1980s Branner and Douady discovered a surgery relating various limbs of the Mandelbrot set.We put this surgery in the framework of “Pacman Renormalization Theory” that combines features of quadratic-like and Siegel renormalizations.We show that Siegel renormalization periodic points (constructed by McMullen in the 1990s) can be promoted to pacman renormalization periodic points.Then we prove that these periodic points are hyperbolic with one-dimensional unstable manifold resolving a long stand- ing problem.As a consequence, we obtain the scaling laws for the centers of satellite components of the Mandelbrot set near the corresponding Siegel parameters. 
----------------------
Subtitles:

 ?n := ?1 ? ?2? ···? ?n
 
 Ik ? {?p,?p + 1};
 Dk ? 2 6= ?.
 Dk ? i 6= ?.
 ?•i+1 ?···? ?•0(z)
 
 
 
 Fn,t := {g ? B |Rm?n(g) ? Fm,t}.
 
 
 
 
 W•\ {0?} /???1?
 
 W•\ {0?} /???1?
 
 
 
 


Text:
----------------------
PACMAN RENORMALIZATION
AND SELF-SIMILARITY OF THE MANDELBROT SET
NEAR SIEGEL PARAMETERS
Renormalization was introduced into Dynamics in the mid 1970s by Feigenbaum,
Coullet and Tresser and since then has established itself as a powerful tool of pen-
etrating into the small-scale structure of phase portraits and bifurcation loci. It
turned out to be challenging to develop a rigorous mathematical theory of renor-
malization (for example, to prove hyperbolicity of the renormalization operator),
but every time when this is achieved, plentiful deep consequences reward the e?ort.
The complex quadratic family provided us with several important renormaliza-
tion schemes: quadratic-like, near-parabolic, and Siegel. All three are intimately
related to the observed self-similarity of the Mandelbrot setM and to the celebrated
Figure 1. A (full) pacman is a 2 : 1 map f : U ? V such that
the critical arc ?1 has 3 preimages: ?0, ?+ and ??.
MLC Conjecture on the local connectivity of M. The conjecture comes in two ?a-
vors, “primitive” and “satellite”. Development of the quadratic-like renormaliza-
tion has led to a substantial progress in the primitive case, while the near-parabolic
renormalization has given an insight into the satellite situation.
In this paper we design a new “pacman” renormalization and prove the hyper-
bolicity of the corresponding renormalization operator. It implies the hyperbolicity
of the Siegel renormalization for arbitrary periodic combinatorics (resolving a prob-
lem going back to the early 1980s) and gives an insight into the self-similarity of
the Mandelbrot set near the main cardioid. In the 2nd part of this project [DL] we
will give further applications by proving local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set at
some satellite parameters of bounded type (that had been previously out of reach)
and showing that the corresponding Julia sets have positive area.
1.1. Statements of the results. Though the Mandelbrot set M is highly non-
homogeneous, it possesses some remarkable self-similarity features. Most notable is
the presence of baby Mandelbrot sets inside M which are almost indistinguishable
fromM itself. The explanation of this phenomenon is provided by the Renormaliza-
tion Theory for quadratic-like maps, which has been a central theme in Holomorphic
Dynamics since the mid-1980s (see [DH2,S,McM1, L1] and references therein).
By exploring the pictures, one can also observe that the Mandelbrot set has self-
similarity features near its main cardioid. For instance, as Figure 2 indicates, near
the (anti-)golde?n mean point, the (pn/pn+2)-limbs of M scale down at rate ??2n,
where ? = (1 +5)/2 and pn are the Fibonacci numbers. The goal of this paper is
to develop a renormalization theory responsible for this phenomenon.
Our renormalization operator acts on the space of “pacmen”, which are holomor-
phic maps f : (U,?)? (V, ?) between two nested domains, see Figure 1, such that
f : U \?0 ? V r ?1 is a double branched covering, where ?1 is an arc connecting ?
to ?V . The pacman renormalization Rf of f (see Figure 5) is de?ned by removing
the sector S1 bounded by ?1 and its image ?2,and taking the ?rst return map to
the remaining space; see §2 for precise de?nitions. Note that it acts on the rotation
numbers as
? ?? 2?? 1?if 0 ? ? ? 1;1 ? ? ? 1;? ??(1.1)if1? ?
2?2
the graph of (1.1) is shown on Figure 3, see Appendix A, in particular, (A.2).
Let us denote by ?per the set of combinatorially periodic rotation numbers; i.e.,
rotation numbers periodic under (1.1). Numbers in ?per belong to the cycles of
numbers with periodic continued fraction expansion.
A pacman is called Siegel with rotation number ? if ? is a Siegel ?xed point with
rotation number ? whose closed Siegel disk is a quasidisk compactly contained in
U (subject of extra technical assumption, see De?nition 3.1).
Theorem 1.1 (Hyperbolicity of the Renormalization). For any rotation number
? ? ?per, the pacman renormalization operator R has a unique periodic point f?
which is a Siegel pacman with rotation number ?.This periodic point is hyper-
bolic with one-dimensional unstable manifold. Moreover, the stable manifold of f?
consists of all Siegel pacmen.
The problem of hyperbolicity goes back to the work of physicists [Wi, MN, MP],
see §1.3 for the description of the previous progress in the area.
Corollary 1.2 (Stability of Siegel maps). Let f be a Siegel pacman with rotation
number ? ? ?per. Consider the space N?(f) of maps su?ciently close to f whose
?-?xed point has rotation number ?. Then the Siegel disk of g depends continuously
on g ? N?(f ).
In fact, the stability of Siegel disks on the unstable manifold is one of the main
steps in the proof of Theorem 1.1.
Let c(?), ? ? R/Z, be the parameterization of the main cardioid C by the rotation
number ?. At any parabolic point c(p/q), there is a satellite hyperbolic component
?p/q of M attached to c(p/q). Let ap/q be the center of this component, i.e., the
unique superattracting parameter inside ?p/q.
In this paper, notation ?n ? ?n will mean that ?n/?n ? const6= 0.
Theorem 1.3 (Scaling Theorem). Let ? ? ?per be a rotation number, and let
pn/qn be its continued fraction approximands. Then
|c(?)? apn/qn| ? q12n .
See Theorem 8.2 for a more precise version of the Scaling Theorem. In particular,
Theorem 8.2 is stated for any one-parameter space witnessing the bifurcation of a
Siegel map.
Self-similarity of the Mandelbrot set near the (anti-)golden parameter is illus-
trated on Figure 2. Theorem 8.2 says that the centers of satellite hyperbolic com-
ponents indeed scale as the picture predicts. In [DL] we combine methods of Theo-
rem 1.3 with methods and ideas from transcendental dynamics to obtain a scaling
law for a much larger class of parameters. The self-similarity of the whole limbs is
still an open question. This problem is closely related to the problem of the real-
ization of parameter rays for the transcendental family on the unstable manifold.
We believe that our methods allow to prove Theorems 1.1 and 1.3 in the case of
rotation numbers of bounded type, the details will appear elsewhere. We conjecture
that an analogous statement is true for arbitrary combinatorics, which would pro-
vide us with a good geometric control of the molecule of the Mandelbrot set (see
Appendix C).
1.2. Outline of the proof. We let:
– e(z) = e2?iz;
– p? : z 7? e(?)z + z2;
– P? be the set of pacmen with rotation number ? ? R/Z;
– ?bnd be the set of combinatorially bounded rotation numbers (i.e., rotation num-
bers with continued fraction expansion where all its coe?cients are bounded).
Let us ?rst review Siegel Renormalization theory which is the most relevant to
our results; for extra historical comments for the progress in this program see §1.3.
Any holomorphic map f : (Uf,?) ? (C, ?) whose ?xed point ? is neutral with
rotation number ? ? ?per is locally linearizable near ?. Its maximal completely
invariant linearization domain Zf is called the Siegel disk of f. If Zf is a quasidisk
compactly contained in Ufwhose boundary contains exactly one critical point,
then f is called a (unicritical) Siegel map. For any ? ? ?per, the quadratic polyno-
mial p? and any Siegel pacman give examples of Siegel maps (see §3, in particular
Theorem 3.2).
There are two versions of the Siegel Renormalization theory: holomorphic com-
muting pairs renormalization and the cylinder renormalization. The former was
developed by McMullen [McM2] (see also an earlier work by Stirnemann [St]) who
proved, for any rotation number ? ? ?per, the existence of a renormalization peri-
odic point f? and the exponential convergence of the renormalizations Rncp(p?) to
the orbit of f?. McMullen has also studied the maximal domain of analyticity for
f?.
The cylinder renormalization Rcyl was introduced by Yampolsky who showed
that f? can be transformed into a periodic point for Rcyl with a ?nite codimension
stable manifold Ws(f?) and at least one-dimensional unstable manifold Wu(f?)
[Ya]. Inou and Shishikura [IS] established hyperbolicity of cylinder renormalization
for high type Siegel parameters and Gaidashev and Yampolsky [GY] proved it for
the golden rotation number (see §1.3). However, the general conjecture that f? is
hyperbolic with dimWu(f?) = 1 remained open.
Let us now select our favorite ? ? ?per; it is ?xed under some iterate of (1.1).
Then the corresponding iterate of the Siegel renormalization ?xes f?, so below we
will refer to the f? as “renormalization ?xed points”.
We start our paper (§2) by discussing an interplay between a “pacman” and
a “prepacman”.The latter (see Figure 6) is a piecewise holomorphic map with
two branches f± : U± ? S, one of which is univalent while the other has “degree
1.5”, with a single critical point. Such an object can be obtained from a pacman by
cutting along the critical arc ?1. For a technical reason, we “truncate” both pacmen
and prepacmen by removing a small disk around the co-? point, see Figure 4.
Then we de?ne, in three steps, the pacman renormalization. First we de?ne a
“pre-renormalization” (De?nition 2.3) as a prepacman obtained as the ?rst return
map to an appropriate sector S. Then, by gluing the boundary arcs of S, we obtain
an “abstract” pacman. Finally, we embed this pacman back to the complex plane.
There are some choices involved in this de?nition.We proceed to show that
near any renormalizable pacman f, the choices can be made so that we obtain a
holomorphic operator R in a Banach ball (Theorem 2.7).
In Section 3 we analyze the structure of Siegel pacmen f.The key result is
that any Siegel map can be renormalized (in an appropriate sense) to a Siegel
pacman (Corollary 3.7), where the rotation number changes as an iterate of (1.1),
see Lemma 3.18.
In case when f = f? is the Siegel renormalization ?xed point, this provides us
with the pacman renormalization ?xed point (§3.7). Moreover, the pacman renor-
malization R becomes a compact holomorphic operator in a Banach neighborhood
of f?, with at least one-dimensional unstable manifolds Wu(f?), see Theorem 3.16.
Along the lines, we introduce and discuss the associated geometric objects (§3.1):
the pacman “Julia sets” K(f) and J(f), “bubble chains”, and “external rays”. We
also use them to show, via the Pullback Argument, that any two combinatorially
equivalent Siegel pacmen are hybrid equivalent (Theorem 3.11), i.e. there is a qc
conjugacy between them which is conformal on the Siegel disk.
For a Siegel pacman f?, any renormalization prepacman can be “spread around”
to provide us with a dynamical tiling of a neighborhood of the Siegel disk, see §4.2
and Figures 7 and 15. Moreover, this tiling is robust under perturbations of f?,
even when the rotation number gets changed, see Theorem 4.6. In this case, the
domain ?lled with the tiles can be used as the central “bubble” for the perturbed
map f, replacing for many purposes the original Siegel disk Z? of f?. In particular,
it allows us to control long-term fn-pullbacks of small disks D centered at ?Z?
(making sure that these pullbacks are not “bitten” by the pacman mouth). This is
the crucial technical result of this paper (Key Lemma 4.8).
When f? is the renormalization ?xed point and the perturbed map f belongs
to its unstable manifold Wu(f?) then we can apply this construction to the anti-
renormalizations R?nf . This allows us to show that the maximal holomorphic
extension of the associated prepacman is a ?-proper map F = (f± : X± ? C),
where X± are plane domains (Theorem 5.1).
Applying this result to a parabolic map f ? Wu(f?), we conclude that its attract-
ing Leau-Fatou ?ower contains the critical point, so the critical point is non-escaping
under the dynamics (Corollary 6.4).
After this preparation, we are ready for proving Theorem 1.1, see §7. Assum-
ing for the sake of contradiction that dimWu(f?) > 1, we can ?nd a holomorphic
curve ?? ?Wu(f?) through f? consisting of Siegel pacmen with the same rotation
number. Approximating this curve with parabolic curves ?n ? Wu(f?), we con-
clude that the critical point is non-escaping for f ? ??. This allows us to apply
Yampolsky’s holomorphic motions argument [Ya] to show that dimWu(f?) = 1.
Finally, using the Small Orbits argument of [L1], we prove that f? is hyperbolic
under the pacman renormalization, completing the proof.
Along the lines we prove the stability of Siegel maps (see Corollary 7.9): if a
small perturbation of a Siegel map f ?xes the multiplier of the ?-?xed point, then
the new map g is again a Siegel map. Moreover, the Siegel quasidisk Zg is in a
small neighborhood of Zf.
To derive Theorem 1.3 from Theorem 1.1, we need to show that the centers of
the hyperbolic components in question are represented on the unstable manifold
Wu(f?).We ?rst show that the roots of these components are represented on
Wu(f?) which requires good control of the corresponding pacmen Julia sets (see
§6.5), and robustness of the renormalization with respect to a particular choice of
cutting arcs, see Appendix B. Then we use quasiconformal deformation techniques
to reach the desired centers from the parabolic points, see §8.
Throughout the paper we use Appendix B containing a topological preparation
justifying robustness of the anti-renormalizations with respect to the choice of cut-
ting arcs.
In Appendix C we formulate the Molecule Conjecture on existence of a pacman
hyperbolic operator with the one-dimension unstable foliation whose horseshoe is
parametrized by the boundary of the main molecule of the Mandelbrot set. This
conjecture would imply the MLC for all in?nitely renormalizable parameters of
satellite type.
1.3. More historical comments. Renormalization of Siegel maps appeared ?rst
in the work by physicists (see [Wi,MN,MP]) as a mechanism for self-similarity of
the golden mean Siegel disk near the critical point. A few years later, Douady and
Ghys discovered a surgery that reduces previously unaccessible geometric problems
for Siegel disks1 of bounded type to much better understood problems for critical
circle maps. This led, in particular, to the local connectivity result for Siegel Julia
sets of bounded type (Petersen [Pe]) and also became a key to the mathematical
study of the Siegel renormalization.In particular, McMullen-Yampolsky theory
mentioned above (see §1.2) is based upon this machinery.
Holomorphic commuting pairs (as well as almost commuting holomorphic pairs)
were studied by Stirnemann. In [St], he gave a computer-assisted proof of the exis-
tence of a renormalization ?xed point with a golden-mean Siegel disk and showed
that the quadratic polynomial with a golden-mean Siegel disk converges to that
?xed point. Recently, Gaidashev and Yampolsky gave a computer-assisted proof of
the hyperbolicity of the renormalization for the golden mean rotation number [GY].
On the other hand, in the mid 2000’s, Inou and Shishikura proved the exis-
tence and hyperbolicity of Siegel renormalization ?xed points of su?ciently high
combinatorial type using a completely di?erent approach, based upon the parabolic
perturbation theory [IS]. For a di?erent viewpoint on this result see [Ya].
The proof in [IS] involves certain computer estimates. A computer-free proof of
hyperbolicity in high type was presented by Cheritat [Che]. His approach also gives
a proof of hyperbolicity for high type in the unicritical case zd + c.
The Siegel renormalization theory achieved further prominence when it was used
for constructing examples of Julia sets of positive area (see Bu?-Cheritat [BC] and
Avila-Lyubich [AL2]).
A di?erent line of research emerged in the 1980s in the work of Branner and
Douady who discovered a surgery that embeds the 1/2-limb of the Mandelbrot set
into the 1/3-limb [BD]. This surgery is the prototype for the pacman renormaliza-
tion that we are developing in this paper.
Note also that according to the Yoccoz inequality, the p/q-limb of the Mandelbrot
It is believed, though, that 1/q2 is the right scaling.set has size O(1/q).The
pacman renormalization can eventually provide an insight into this problem.
Remark 1.4. Genadi Levin has informed us about his unpublished work where it
is proven, by di?erent methods, that
where ap/q is the center of the p/q-satellite hyperbolic component and c(p/q) is
its root.He has also informed us that (1.2) has been independently established
by Mitsuhiro Shishikura. Note that Theorem 1.3 gives a precise asymptotics for
|ap/q ? c(p/q)|.
1.4. Notation. We often write a partial map as f : W 99K W ; this means that
Domf ? Im f ? W .
A simple arc is an embedding a closed interval. We often say that a simple arc
`: [0,1] ? C connects `(0) and `(1). A simple closed curve or a Jordan curve is an
embedding of the unit circle. A simple curve is either a simple closed curve or a
simple arc.
A closed topological disk is a subset of a plane homeomorphic to the closed unite
disk. In particular, the boundary of a closed topological disk is a Jordan curve. A
quasidisk is a closed topological disk qc-homeomorphic to the closed unit disk.
Given a subset U of the plane, we denote by int U the interior of U.
Let U be a closed topological disk. For simplicity we say that a homeomorphism
f : U ? C is conformal if f | intU is conformal. Note that if U is a quasidisk, then
such an f admits a qc extension through ?U.
A closed sector, or topological triangle S is a closed topological disk with two
distinguished simple arcs ?? , ?+ in ?S meeting at the vertex v of S satisfying
{v} = ?? ??+. Suppose further that ?? , int S, ?+ have clockwise orientation at v.
Then ?? is called the left boundary of S while ?+ is called the right boundary of S.
A closed topological rectangle is a closed topological disk with four marked sides.
Let f : (W,?)? (C, ?) be a holomorphic map with a distinguished ?-?xed point.
We will usually denote by ? the multiplier at the ?-?xed point. If ? = e(?) with
? ? R, then ? is called the rotation number of f. If, moreover, ? = p/q ? Q, then
p/q is also the combinatorial rotation number: there are exactly q local attracting
petals at ? and f maps the i-th petal to i + p counting counterclockwise.
Consider a continuous map f : U ? C and let S ? C be a connected set. An
f-lift is a connected component of f?1(S). Let
x0, x1,. .. xn,xi+1 = f(xi)
be an f orbit with xn ? S. The connected component of f ?n(S) containing x0 is
called the pullback of S along the orbit x0,. .. , xn.
To keep notations simple, we will often suppress indices. For example, we denote
a pacman by f : Uf ? V , however a pacman indexed by i is denoted as fi : Ui ? V
? V .instead of fi : Ufi
Consider two partial maps f : X 99K X and g: Y 99K Y . A homeomorphism
h : X ? Y is equivariant if
h? f(x) = g? h(x)(1.3)
for all x with x ? Dom f and h(x) ? Dom g. If (1.3) holds for all x ? T , then we
say that h is equivariant on T .
We will usually denote an analytic renormalization operator as “R”, i.e. Rf is
a renormalization of f obtained by an analytic change of variables. A renormal-
ization postcomposed with a straightening will be denoted by “R”; for example,
Rs : Ms ? M is the Douady-Hubbard straightening map from a small copy Ms
of M to the Mandelbrot set. The action of the renormalization operator on the
rotation numbers will be denoted by “R”.
Slightly abusing notations, we will often identify a triangulation (or a lamination)
with its support.
Acknowledgments. The ?rst author was partially supported by Simons Founda-
tion grant at the IMS, DFG grant BA4197/6-1, and ERC grant “HOLOGRAM”.
The second author thanks the NSF for their continuing support.
The results of this paper were ?rst announced at the North-American Workshop
in Holomorphic Dynamics, May 27–June 4, 2016, Cancu?n, Me?xico.
Figures 2, 8, 26, 36 are made with W. Jung’s program Mandel.
De?nition 2.1 (Full pacman). Consider a closed topological disk V with a simple
arc ?1 connecting a boundary point of V to a point ? in the interior. We will call
?1 the critical arc of the pacman.
A full pacman is a map
such that (see Figure 1)
• f(?) = ?;
• U is a closed topological disks with U ? V ;
• the critical arc ?1 has exactly 3 lifts ?0 ? U and ?? ,?+ ? ?U such that
?0 start at the ?xed point ? while ?? , ?+ start at the pre-?xed point ??;
we assume that ?1 does not intersect ?0,?? , ?+ away from ?;
• f : U ? V is analytic and f : U \ ?0 ? V \ ?1 is a two-to-one branched
covering;
• f admits a locally conformal extension through ?U \{??}.
Figure 4. A pacman is a truncated version of a full pacman, see
Figure 1; it is an almost 2 : 1 map f : (U,O0) ? (V, O) with
f(?U) ? ?V ? ?1 ? ?O.
Since f : U \ ?0 ? V \ ?1 is a two-to-one branched cover, f has a unique critical
point, called c0(f), in U \ ?0. We denote by c1(f) the image of c0.
We will mostly consider truncated pacmen or simply pacmen de?ned as follows.
Consider ?rst a full pacman f : U ? V and let O be a small closed topological disk
around ? ? int O 3 c1(f) and assume that ?1 cross-intersects ?O at single point.
Then f?1(O) consists of two connected components, call them O0 3 ? and O?0 3 ??.
We obtain a truncated pacman
f : (U \ O?0, O0) ? (V,O).(2.1)
A pacman is an analytic map as in (2.1) admitting a locally conformal extension
through ?U such that f can be topologically extended to a full pacman, see Figure 4.
In particular, every point in V \ O has two preimages while every point in O has a
single preimage.
2.1. Dynamical objects. Let us ?x a pacman f : U ? V .
below are sensitive to small deformations of ?U.
The non-escaping set of a pacman is?
f?n(U).Kf :=
The escaping set is V \ Kf.
We recognize the following two subsets of the boundary of U: the external bound-
ary ?extU := f?1(?V ) and the forbidden part of the boundary ?frbU := ?U \ ?extU .
Suppose `0 : [0, 1] ? V is an arc connecting a point in Kfto ?V . We de?ne
inductively images `m : [0, 1] ? V for m ? M ? {1, 2, .. .,?} as follows. Suppose
tm ? 1 be the maximal such that the image of [0, tm] under `m is within U. If
`m(tm) ? ?extU, then we say `m+1 is de?ned and we set `m+1(t) := f(`m(t/tm))
for t? 1. Abusing notation, we write
`m = f(`m?1).
We de?ne external rays of a pacman in the following way.Let us embed a
rectangle R in V \ U so that bottom horizontal side B is equal to ?extU and the
top horizontal side T is a subset of ?V . The images of the vertical lines within R
form a lamination of V \ U. We pull back this lamination to all iterated preimages
f?n(R). Leaves of this lamination that start at ?V are called external ray segments
of f; in?nite external ray segments are called external rays of f. Note that if ? is
an external ray, then f(?), as de?ned in the previous paragraph, is also an external
ray.
We have two maps from B to T: one is the natural identi?cation ? along the
vertical lines, the other is the map f : B 99K T which is de?ned only on f?1(T ).
Composition thereof, ? = ??1 ? f : B 99K B is a partially de?ned two-to-one map.
We consider the set A ? B of all the points with whole forward orbits are well
de?ned. Then A is completely invariant and there is a unique orientation preserving
map ?: A ? S1 which semi-conjugates ?: A ?A to the doubling map of the circle.
We say that ?(a) is the angle of the external ray segment passing through the point
a.
An external ray segment passing through a point a ? A is in?nite (i.e. it is
an external ray) if and only if it hits neither an iterated precritical point nor an
iterated lift of ?frbU. The latter possibility is a major technical issue we have to
deal with.
2.2. Prime pacman renormalization. Let us ?rst give an example of a prime
renormalization of full pacmen where we cut out the sector bounded by ?1 and
?2, see Figure 5. This renormalization is motivated by the surgery procedure that
Branner and Douady [BD] used to construct a map between the Rabbit L1/3 and
the Basilica L1/2 limbs of the Mandelbrot set, see Appendix C.1. Pacman renor-
malization will be de?ned in §2.3.
Recall that a sector S is a closed topological disk with two distinguished arcs in
?S meeting at single point, called the vertex of S. Suppose f : U ? V is a full
pacman and
(A) ?0, ?1, and ?2 := f(?1) are mutually disjoint except for the ?xed point ?.
Denote by S1 the closed sector of V bounded by ?1??2 and not containing ?0. Let
us further assume that
(B) S1 does not contain the critical value; and
(C) ??? ?+ ? V \ S1.
Let V? be the Riemann surface with boundary obtained from V \int S1 by gluing
??1 := f?1(?2) ? ?1 and ?2 along f. This means that there is a quotient map
? : V \ int S1 ? V?
such that ? is conformal in V \ S1 while ?(z) = ?(f(z))? V? for all z ? ?1? . Let us
select an embedding V? ?? C.
Figure 5. Prime renormalization of a pacman: delete the sector
S1, forget in U the sector S0? attached to ??, and iterate f twice
on S0. By gluing ?1 and ?2 along f : ?1 ? ?2 we obtain a new
pacman f? : U? ? V? .
The sector S1 has two f-lifts; let S0 be the lift of S1 attached to ? and let S?0 bethe lift of S1 attached to ??{. Condition (B) implies that ??? ?+ ? V \ S0. De?ne
if z ? U \ (S1 ? S0? S0? )f(z),f?(z) :=.
if z ? S0? f?1(U).f2(z)
Then the map f? descends via ? into a full pacman f? : U? ? V? with the critical ray
??1.
2.3. Pacman renormalization. Let us start with de?ning an analogue of com-
muting pairs for pacmen.
A map ? : S ? V from a closed sector (S,?? , ?+) onto a closed topological disk
V ? C is called a gluing if ? is conformal in the interior of S, ?(??) = ?(?+), and
? can be conformally extended to a neighborhood of any point in ?? ? ?+ except
the vertex of S.
De?nition 2.2 (Prepacmen, Figure 6). Consider a sector S with boundary rays
?? , ?+ and with an interior ray ?0 that divides S into two subsectors T? , T+.
Let f? : U? ? S,f+ : U+ ? S be a pair of holomorphic maps, de?ned on U? ?
T? ,U+ ? T+.We say that F = (S, f? , f+) is a prepacman if there exists a
gluing ? of S which projects (f? , f+) onto a pacman f : U ? V where ?? , ?+ are
mapped to the critical arc ?1 and ?0 is mapped to ?0.
The map ? is called a renormalization change of variables.
The de?nition implies that f? and f+ commute in a neighborhood of ?0. Note
that every pacman f : U ? V has a prepacman obtained by cutting V along the
critical arc ?1.
The numbers a, b are the renormalization return times.
The renormalization of f is called prime if a + b = 3.
Similarly, a pacman renormalization is de?ned for any map f : U ? V with a
distinguished ?xed point which will be called ?.For example, we will show in
Corollary 3.7 that any Siegel map is pacman renormalizable.
Combinatorially, a general pacman renormalization is an iteration of the prime
renormalization – see details in Appendix A, in particular Lemma A.2.
We de?ne  = G to be the union of points in the f-orbits of U ? ,U+ before
they return to S. Naturally,  is a triangulated neighborhood of ?, see Figure 7.
We call  a renormalization triangulation and we will often say that  is obtained
by spreading around U? , U+.
De?nition 2.4 (Conjugacy respecting prepacmen). Let f and g be any two maps
with distinguished ?-?xed points and let R and Q be two prepacmen in the dy-
namical plane of f and g de?ning some pacman renormalizations. Let h be a local
conjugacy between f and g restricted to neighborhoods of their ?-?xed points.
Then h respects R and Q if h maps the triangulation R to Q so that the image
of (SR, UR,±) is (SQ,UQ,±).
2.4. Banach neighborhoods. Consider a pacman f : Uf ? V with a non-empty
We assume that there is a topological disk U? c Uf with atruncation disk O.
piecewise smooth boundary such that f extends analytically to U? and continuously
to its closure. Choose a small ? > 0 and de?ne NU?(f, ?) to be the set of analytic
maps g : U? ? C with continuous extensions to ?U? such that
sup|f(z)? g(z)| < ?.
Then NU?(f, ?) is a Banach ball.
We say a curve ? lands at ? at a well-de?ned angle if there exists a tangent line
to ? at ?.
Lemma 2.5. Suppose ?0, ?1 land at ? at distinct well-de?ned angles. If ? > 0 is
su?ciently small, then for every g ? NU?(f, ?) there is a domain Ug ? U? such that
g : Ug ? V is a pacman with the same V, ?1, O (up to translation).
Proof. For g ? NU? (f,?) with small ?, set
:= V (f) + (?(g)? ?(f)),V (g)
:= ?1(f) + (?(g) ? ?(f)),?1(g)
:= O(f) + (?(g)? ?(f)),O(g)
Figure 6. A (full) prepacman (f? : U? ? S,f+ : U+ ? S). We
have U? = ?? ? ?+ and f? maps ?? two-to-one to S? and ?+
to S+. The map f+ maps U+ univalently onto S+. After gluing
dynamically ?? and ?+ we obtain a full pacman: the arcs ?? and
?+ project to ?1, the arc ?0 projects to ?0, and the arc ? projects
to ?2.
and set ?0(g) to be the lift of ?1(g) landing at ?. Since ?0(f), ?1 land at distinct
well-de?ned angles, so are ?0(g), ?1 if ? is small; i.e. ?0(g), ?1 are disjoint.
Set g? = f + ?(g ? f) and T?(z) := z + (?(g?)? ?(f)), where ? ? [0,1]. De?ne
??(z) = g??1?T??f(z) on ?Uf where the inverse branch is chosen so that ?0(z) = z
and ??(z) is continuous with respect to ?. We claim that ?? is well de?ned and that
??(?Uf) is a simple closed curve for all ? ? [0,1]. Indeed, let A b U? be a closed
annular neighborhood of ?Uf that contains no critical points of f.For ? small
enough, the derivative of any g ? NU? (f,?) is uniformly bounded and non-vanishing
on a slightly shrunk A; in particular g has no critical points in A.
It follows that ?? | A has uniformly bounded derivative and (choosing yet smaller
?, if necessary) is close to the identity map, hence ??(?Uf) ? A is well-de?ned for
all ?. Since f has no critical values in A, it is locally injective, which implies that
??(x) 6= ??(y) when x is su?ciently close to y. We conclude that ?? is injective
on ?Uf. Therefore ?1(?Uf ) is a simple closed curve; let Ug be the disk enclosed by
?1(?Uf). It is straightforward to check that g : Ug ? V is a pacman with critical
arc ?1 and truncation disk O.
? V .Consider a pacman f : UfApplying the ?-lemma, we can endow all
g : Ug ? V from a small neighborhood of f with a foliated rectangle Rg as in §2.1
such that Rg moves holomorphically and the holomorphic motion of Rg is equi-
variant. As a consequence, an external ray R(g) with a given angle depends holo-
morphically on g unless R(g) hits an iterated lift of ?frbUg or an iterated precritical
point.
Lemma 2.6 (Stability of periodic rays). Suppose a periodic ray R(f) lands at a
repelling periodic point x in the dynamical plane of f. Then the ray R(g) lands at
x for all g in a small neighborhood of f. Moreover, the closure R(g) is contained
in a small neighborhood of R(f).
Proof. Since x is repelling periodic, it is stable by the implicit function theorem.
Present R(g) as a concatenation of arcs R1R2R3 . . . such that Ri+1(g) is an iterated
lift of Ri(g). By continuity, Ri(g) is stable for i ? n, where n is big if g is su?ciently
close to f. If n is su?ciently big and g is su?ciently close to f, then Rn(g) is in
a small neighborhood of x(g) and, since x(g) is repelling, Rn+1(g) is in an even
smaller neighborhood of x(g). Proceeding by induction, we obtain that Rn+j(g)
shrinks to x(g); i.e. R(g) lands at x(g).It also follows that R(g) is in a small
neighborhood of R(f).
2.5. Pacman analytic operator. Suppose that f? : U? ? V? is a renormalization
of f : Uf ? V via a quotient map ?f : Sf ? V? that extends analytically through
?Sf\{?} (this actually follows from the de?nition of renormalization) where Sf ? V
is the domain of a prepacman F? such that curves ?0,?+, ?? all land at ? at pairwise
distinct well-de?ned angles. We claim that there exists an analytic renormalization
operator de?ned on a neighborhood of f.
We note that ?± = fk±(?0) for some integers k+,k?.For a map g that is
su?ciently close to f, the fact that the three curves land at di?erent angles implies
that ?0, gk+(?0), gk?(?0) are disjoint. De?ne ?g: ?0 ? ??? ?+ ? C by
?g = gk± ? ?g ? f?k±?g : z 7? z + ?(g)? ?(f )on ?0andon ?±.
Then ?g is an equivariant holomorphic motion of ?0? ??? ?+ over a neighborhood
of f. By the ?-lemma [BR, ST] ?g extends to a holomorphic motion of Sf over a
possibly smaller neighborhood of f. Denote by µg the Beltrami di?erential of ?g.
De?ne a Beltrami di?erential ?g on C as ?g = (?f )?µg on V? and ?g = 0 outside of
V? and let ?g be the solution of the Beltrami equation
??g??g
= ?g ?z?z?
that ?xes ?, ?, and the critical value. We see that ?g := ?g??f? ?g?1 is conformal
on Sg := ?g(S). It follows, that ?g depends analytically on g (see Remark on page
345 of [L1]).
We claim now that G? = (Sg,gk?,gk+) is a prepacman. Indeed, by de?nition of
?g, we have gk±(?g(?0)) = ?± and ?g glues G? to a map g? which is close to f?. By
Lemma 2.5, g? restricts to a pacman with the same range as f? . We have:
Theorem 2.7 (Analytic renormalization operator). Suppose that f? : U? ? V? is
? V via a quotient map ?f? V? .a renormalization of f : Uf: SfAssume
that the curves ?0,??, ?+ (see De?nition 2.2) land at ? at pairwise distinct well-
de?ned angles. Then for every su?ciently small neighborhood NU?(f, ?), there exists
a compact analytic pacman renormalization operator R: g 7? g? de?ned on NU?(f, ?)
Figure 7.Pacman renormalization of f: the ?rst return map
from U? ? U+ back to S = S? ? S+ is a prepacman. Spreading
around U±: the orbits of U? and U+ before returning back to S
triangulate a neighborhood  of ?; we obtain f :  ? ? S, and
we require that  ? S is compactly contained in Dom f.
such that R(f) = f?. Moreover, the gluing map ?g, used in this renormalization,
also depends analytically on g.
Proof. We have already shown that g? depends analytically on g ? NU?(f, ?). Choose
an intermediate domain U?? b U? with Ufb U?? b U? so that the operator R is
the composition of the restriction operator NU?(f, ?) ? NU??(f,?) and the pacman
renormalization operator de?ned on NU??(f, ?).Since the former is compact, we
conclude that R is compact.
3. Siegel pacmen
We say a holomorphic map f : U ? V is Siegel if it has a ?xed point ?, a Siegel
quasidisk Zf 3 ? compactly contained in U, and a unique critical point c0 ? U that
is on the boundary of Zf. Note that in [AL2] a Siegel map is assumed to satisfy
additional technical requirements; these requirements are satis?ed by restricting f
to an appropriate small neighborhood of Zf.
Let us foliate Siegel disk Zf of f by equipotentials parametrized by their heights
ranging from 0 (the height of ?) to 1 (the height of ?Zf). Namely, if h: Zf ? D1 is
a linearizing map conjugating f | Zf and the rotation z ? e(?)z, then the preimage
under h of the circle with radius ? is the equipotential of Zf at height ?.
De?nition 3.1. A pacman f : U ? V is Siegel if
• f is a Siegel map with Siegel disk Zf centered at ?;
• the critical arc ?1 is the concatenation of an external ray R1 followed by an
inner ray I1 of Zf such that the unique point in the intersection ?1 ? ?Zf
is not precritical; and
• writing f : (U \ O0? ,O0) ? (V, O) as in (2.1), the disk O is a subset of Zf
bounded by its equipotential.
The rotation number of a Siegel pacman (or a Siegel map) is ? ? R/Z so that
e(?) is the multiplier at ?. It follows (see Theorem 3.2) that the rotation number
of Siegel map is in ?bnd. The level of truncation of f is the height of ?O.
Since ?1 is a concatenation of an external ray R1 and an internal ray I1, so
is ?0: it is a concatenation of an external ray R0 and an internal ray I0 with
f(R0 ? I0) = R1 ? I1.? Vf? VgTwo Siegel pacmen f : Ufand g: Ugare
combinatorially equivalent if they have the same rotation number and if R0(f1)
and R0(f2) have the same external angles, see (2.1). Starting from §3.6 we will
normalize ?0 so that it passes through the critical value.
A hybrid conjugacy between Siegel maps f1 : U1 ? V1 and f2 : U2 ? V2 is a
qc-conjugacy h: U1? V1 ? U2 ? V2 that is conformal on the Siegel disks. A hybrid
conjugacy between Siegel pacmen is de?ned in a similar fashion. We will show in
Theorem 3.11 that combinatorially equivalent pacmen are hybrid equivalent.
We will often refer to the connected component Z?f of f?1(Zf )\ Zf attached to
c0 as co-Siegel disk.
3.1. Local connectivity and bubble chains. Consider a quadratic polynomial
p? : z ? e(?)z + z2.
Theorem 3.2. If ? ? ?bnd, then the closed Siegel disk Z of p?is a quasidisk
containing the critical point of p?.
Conversely, suppose a holomorphic map f : U ? V with a single critical point
has a ?xed Siegel quasidisk Zf b U ? V containing the critical point of f . Then f
has a rotation number of bounded type.
In particular, p? is a Siegel map. The ?rst part of Theorem 3.2 follows essentially
from the Douady-Ghys surgery, see [D1]. Conversely, if f : U ? V is a Siegel map,
then applying the inverse Douady-Ghys surjery we obtain a quasicritical circle map
f?, see [AL2, De?nitions 3.1]. By [H,Sw,AL2], the restriction of f? to the unit circle
is quasisymmetrically conjugate to the rigid rotation if and only if the rotation
number of f? is bounded. (Compare to [GJ].)
Let us now ?x a polynomial p = p? with ? ? ?bnd. A bubble of p is either
• Z0 := Zp, or
• Z1 := Z?p = p?1(Zp)\ Zp, or
• an iterated p-lift of Z?p (see §1.4 for the de?nition of a lift).
The generation of a bubble Zk is the smallest n ? 0 such that pn(Zk) ? Z0. In
particular, Z0 has generation 0 and Z1 has generation 1. If the generation of Zk is
at least 2, then p: Zk ? p(Zk) admits a conformal extension through ?Zk (because
p(Zk) 3 c1).
We say that a bubble Zn is attached to a bubble Zn?1 if Zn? Zn?1 6= ? and the
generation of Zn is greater than the generation of Zn?1.
A limb of a bubble Zk is the closure of a connected component of Kp \ Zk not
containing the ?-?xed point. A limb of Z0 = Zp is called primary.
Theorem 3.3 ([Pe]). The ?lled-in Julia set Kp is locally connected. Moreover, for
every ? > 0 there is an n ? 0 such that every connected component of Kp minus all
bubbles with generation at most n has diameter less than ?.
In particular the diameter of bubbles in Kp tends to 0: for every ? > 0 there are
at most ?nitely many bubbles with diameter greater than ?. Similarly, the diameter
of limbs of any bubble tends to 0.
An (in?nite) bubble chain of Kp is an in?nite sequence of bubbles B = (Z1,Z2, .. .)
such that Z1 is attached to Zp and Zn+1 is attached to Zn, see Figure 8.
As a con?sequence of Theorem 3.3, every bubble chain B = (Z1, Z2,. .. ) lands:there is a unique x ? Kp such that for every neighborhood U of x there is an m ? 0
Zi is within U. Conversely, if x ? Kp does not belong to any bubble,such that
then there is a bubble chain B = (Z1,Z2, . . .) landing at x. A point x is periodic
if and only if B is periodic: there is an m > 1 and q ? 1 such that pqmaps
(Zm,Zm+1,. . . ) to (Z1,Z2, . . .).
Let f : U ? V be a Siegel pacman. Limbs, bubbles, and bubble chains for f are
de?ned in the same way as for quadratic polynomials with Siegel quasidisks. In
particular, a bubble of f is either Zf, or Z?f = f?1(Zf)\ Zf, or an fn?1-lift of Z?f ,
where n is the generation of the bubble. Since Zf is the only bubble intersecting
{c1} ? ?1, all bubbles of positive generation are conformal lifts of Z?f.
?We de?ne the Julia set of f as
We will show in Theorem 3.12 that Theorem 3.3 holds for standard Siegel pacmen
and that Jf is the closure of repelling periodic points.
Limbs, bubbles, and bubble chains of a prepacman F are preimages of the corre-
sponding dynamical objects of f.
3.2. Siegel prepacmen. A prepacman Q of a Siegel pacman q is also called Siegel;
the rotation number and level of truncation of Q are those of q.Recall that Q
consists of two commuting maps q? : U? ? SQ, q+ : U+ ? SQ such that U? and
U+ are separated by ?0. Given a Siegel map f we say that f has a prepacman Q
around x ? ?Zf if q? ,q+ are iterates of f, the vertex of SQ is at ?(f), and ?0(Q)
intersects ?Zf at x.
Lemma 3.4. Suppose that p is a Siegel quadratic polynomial with rotation number
? ? ?bnd. Consider a point x ? ?Zp such that x is neither the critical point of p
nor its iterated preimage. Then for every r ? (0,1) and every ? > 0, the map p has
a Siegel prepacman
Q = (q? : U? ? SQ,q+ : U+ ? SQ)(3.2)
around x such that
• the rotation number of Q is a renormalization of ? – iteration of (A.2);
• for every z ? U? ? U+ the orbit z, p(z), .. ., pk(z) is in the ?-neighborhood
of Zp for k such that pk(z) = q±(z); and
Figure 8. A bubble chain (red) landing at the ?-?xed point.
Proof of Lemma 3.4. Consider the sector renormalization (pa| X? ,pb| X+)
from De?nition 3.5 and assume that the angle ? of X is small. We will now extend
(pa | X? ,pb | X+) beyond Zp to obtain a prepacman (3.2), see Figure 9. Set
I? := pb(I0),I+ := pa(I0),I := fa+b(I0).
Then the sector X? is bounded by I?, I0 and X+ is bounded by I0, I+.
Figure 9. A full Siegel prepacman, compare with Figure 6. In
the dynamical plane of a quadratic polynomial p, the sector
SQ = S? ? S+ is bounded by R? ? I? ? I+ ? R+ and truncated
by an equipotential at small height. Pulling back S? ,S+ along
appropriate branches of pa,pb we obtain U? = ?? ? ?+ and U+
so that (pa | U? , pb | U+) is a full prepacman(3.3). Truncating
(pa | U? , pb | U+) at ? and at the vertex where R+ meets E (see
Figure 11) we obtain a required prepacman (3.2).
Since x is not precritical, there are unique external rays R? , R+ , R extending
I? ,I+ , I beyond Zp. Let SQ be the closed sector bounded by R?? I? ? I+ ? R+
and truncated by an external equipotential E at a small height ? > 0. The curve
R? I divides S into two closed sectors S+ and S? such that S+ is between R??I?
and R?I while S? is between R?I and R+? I+. We note that pa(X?) ? S? and
pb(X+) ? S+.
Let us next specify U? ? X? ,U+ ? X+ such that
Q = (q? ,q+) = (pa | U? ,pb | U+)(3.3)
is a full prepacman. Since the p-orbits of X? , X+ cover Z? before they return
back to X, we see that ?X ? ?Zp has a unique precritical point, call it c?0, that
travels though the critical point of p before it returns to X. Below we assume that
c?0 ? X?; the case c?0 ? X+ is analogous. Then S+ has a conformal pullback U+
along pb: X+ ? S+. We have U+ ? SQ because rays and equipotentials bounding
SQ enclose U+.
The sector S? has a degree two pullback ?? along pa: X? ? S?.Under
pa: ?? ? S? the ?xed point ? has two preimages, one of them is ?, we denote
Figure 10. Since W? is truncated by an equipotential of Zp? at
small height, the point pj(z) ? W ?\ Zp is in a small neighborhood
of c0.
the other preimage by ?. Let ?+ be the conformal pullback of S+ along the orbit
pa: {?} ? {?}. We de?ne U? := ????+ ? SQ and we observe that Q in (3.3) is
a full prepacman.
By Theorem 3.3, primary limbs of Kp intersecting a small neighborhood of x
have small diameters. By choosing ? and ? su?ciently small we can guarantee that
SQ \ Zp is in a small neighborhood of x.
Let us now truncate Q at level r and let us show that the orbit
z, p(z), . . ., pk(z) = q±(z),k ? {a, b}
of any z ? U± is in a small neighborhood of Zp. The truncation of Q at level r
removes points in U? = ??? ?+ with pa- images in the subdisk of Zp bounded by
the equipotential at height t := r?. Since ? is small, we obtain that t is close to 1.
Since Kp is locally connected (Theorem 3.3), all the external rays of p land. For
z ? U± \ Kf, de?ne ?(z) ? Kp to be the landing point of the external ray passing
through z. Since SQ is truncated by an equipotential at a small height, the orbit
of z stays close to that of ?(z). This reduces the claim to the case z ? Kp ? U±.
By Theorem 3.2, there is an `? 0 such that all of the big (with diameter at least
?) primary limbs of p are attached to one of c0,c?1, .. . , c?`, where c0 is the critical
point of p and c?i is the unique preimage of c0 under pi | Zp. Since ? is assumed
to be small, the orbit of c?0 travels through all c?`,. .. , c0 before it returns to SQ.
Let us denote by L the primary limb of p containing z (the case z ? Zp is trivial).
If L is not attached to c?0, then by the above discussion all L,p(L),. . . , pk(L) =
q±(L) are small and the claim follows.
Suppose that L is attached to c?0. Denote by L?i the connected component of
Kp \Zp attached to c?i. Since c?0 travels through a critical point, we have L = L?j
for some j < k.
Let W be the pullback of SQ along
pk?j : c0 = pj(c?0) ? pk(c?0)
and let W? be W truncated by the equipotential of Zp? at height t, see Figure 10.
Since t = r? is close to 1, we obtain that W ? ? L?0 is in a small neighborhood of c0
Figure 11. By truncating the prepacman from Figure 9 and em-
bedding rectangles R±, we endow the prepacman with external
rays.
because the angle of W at ?? (the non-?xed preimage of ?) is small – it is equal to ?.
Therefore, pj(z) is close to c0, and by continuity all pj?1(z), pj?2(z),. . . , pj?`(z) are
close to c0, c?1,. .. , c?`. Recall that pj?i(z) ? L?i. Since L0, L?1, .. ., L?` are the
only big limbs, we obtain that the orbit z,p(z), . .. ,pk(z) is in a small neighborhood
of Zp.
It remains to specify external rays for Q.As it shown on the Figure 11 we
slightly truncate SQ at the vertex where R+ meets the equipotential E and we
slightly truncate U± such the truncations are respected dynamically and such that
the preimage of the ?SQ \ (R?? R+) under Q consists of exactly two curves that
project to ?extUq, where q: Uq ? Vqis the pacman of Q. We now can embed
in SQ \ (U? ? U+) two rectangles R? and R+ that de?ne external rays of Q as
in §2.1.
Theorem 3.6. Any two Siegel maps with the same rotation number are hybrid
conjugate on neighborhoods of their closed Siegel disks.
Proof. By [AL2, Proposition 4.3] any Siegel maps f,g can be obtained by perform-
ing the Douady-Ghys surgery on quasicritical circle maps f?, g?. By [AL2, Theorem
3.19], there is a qc map h? conjugating f? and g? in a small neighborhood of the unit
circle. Then h? descents into a qc map h conjugating f and g in small neighbor-
hoods of the boundaries of their Siegel disks. A hybrid conjugacy between f and
g is obtained by setting h | Zf to be the canonical conformal conjugacy between
f | Zf and g | Zg and running the pullback argument.
As a corollary Theorem 3.6 and Lemma 3.4 we obtain.
Corollary 3.7. Every Siegel map f : U ? V is pacman renormalizable.
Moreover the following holds. Let f be a Siegel map and let p be the unique qua-
dratic polynomial with the same rotation number as f. Let h be a hybrid conjugacy
from a neighborhood of Zfto a neighborhood of Zp respectively. Then there are
prepacmen R and Q in the dynamical planes of f and p respectively such that h
respects R and Q in the sense of De?nition 2.4.
Proof. Choose a small ? > 0 such that the ?-neighborhood of Zf is in the domain
of h. Then h pullbacks a prepacman Q from Lemma 3.4 to a prepacman R in the
dynamical plane of f. This shows that f is pacman renormalizable.
Lemma 3.8. Suppose that a Siegel pacman f is a renormalization of a quadratic
polynomial. Then the non-escaping set Kf is locally connected.
Moreover, for every ? > 0 there is an n ? 0 such that every connected component
of Kf minus all the bubbles with generation at most n is less than ?. All the external
rays of f land and the landing point in Jf. Conversely, every point in Jfis the
landing point of an external ray. The Julia set Jf is the closure of repelling periodic
points.
Proof. Follows from Theorem 3.3.Suppose that f is obtained from a quadratic
polynomial p. Then every bubble Z? of f is obtained from a bubble Z?? of p by
removing an open sector. All of the limbs of Z?? attached to the removed sector are
also removed. It follows from Theorem 3.3 that for ? > 0 there is an n ? 0 such
that every connected component of Kfminus all of the bubbles with generation
at most n is less than ?. Since bubbles of f are locally connected, so is Kf . The
landing property of external rays is straightforward.
3.4. Rational rays of Siegel pacmen. By a rational point we mean either a
periodic or preperiodic point. Similarly, a periodic or preperiodic ray is rational.
Let us ?x pacmen f, p and prepacmen R, Q as in Corollary 3.7. Let KR be the
nloocna-lenscoanp-iensgcaspeitnogfsRet.oBf yf:de?nition, KR?? Kf ; spreading around KR we de?ne the
Klfoc :=fn(KR).(3.4)
TSihmisiliasrtlyhewseetdeo?fnpeoint that do not escap?e R under f : R ? R?SR, see Figure 7.
Klpoc :=pn(KQ).
IJtuilsiaimsemt ediate that h conjugates?f | K[ lfoc and]p?n| Klpoc. As a consequence, the local
Jlfoc :=f | Klfoc(?Zf)
is the closure of repelling periodic points because so is Jlpoc. (Indeed, every y ? Jlpoc
is the landing point of an external ray Ry because Jp is locally connected. Since
external rays in a pacman are parametrized by angles in S1 (see §2.1), p has a
periodic external ray Rx landing at x ? Jlpoc.) Moreover, for every periodic point
y ? Klfoc there is a unique periodic bubble chain By of Klfoc landing at y.
Lemma 3.9 (External rays). Let y ? Jlfoc be a periodic point. Then there is a
periodic external ray Ry landing at y with the same period as y.
Figure 12. Illustration to the proof of Lemma 3.9. The ray R1
has preimages R` and R? that land at Z1 such that R`?R? together
with together with appropriate arcs in ?V ? Z1 bound a disk D
containing y. The disk D has a univalent lift Dp b D. By Schwarz
lemma, fp: Dp ? D is expanding, which implies that there is an
external ray landing at y.
Proof. Let By = (Z1,Z2, .. .) be the bubble chain in Klfoc landing at y. Denote by
x the unique point in the intersection of ?1 ? ?Z?. By De?nition 3.1, the external
ray R1 lands at x. There are two iterated preimages x`, x? ? ?Z1 of x (by density
of those) such that the rays R`, R? (iterated lifts of R1) landing at x`, x? together
with Z1 separate y from Zf, see Figure 12. We denote by D the open subdisk of
V bounded by R`, R?, Z1 and containing y. Let Dp be the (univalent) pullback
of D along f p: {y} ? {y}. Then Dp b D. By the Schwarz lemma, fp : Dp ? D
expands the hyperbolic metric of D.
There is a unique periodic external ray Ry in D with period p. We claim that
Ry lands at y. Indeed, parametrize R as R: R>0 ? V with fp(Ry(t + p)) = Ry(t).
Since all the points in D away from y escape in ?nite time under fp : Dp ? D, the
Euclidean distance between R(t) and y goes to 0 as t ? +?.
The next lemma is a preparation for a Pullback Argument.
Lemma 3.10 (Rational approximation of ?1). For every ? > 0, there are
• periodic points x`, x? ? Jlfoc,
• external rays R` and R? landing at x`, x? respectively,
• periodic bubble chains B` and B? in Klfoc landing at x`, x? respectively, and
• internal rays I` and I? of Zf landing at the points at which B` and B? are
attached
such that R` ? B` ? I` and R? ? B?? I? are in the ?-neighborhood of ?1 and such
that R` ? B` ? I` is on the left of ?1 while R? ? B?? I? is on the right of ?1.
Proof. Consider a ?nite set of periodic points y1,y2,. . . , yp ? Jlfoc. By Lemma 3.9
each yi is the landing point of an external periodic ray, call it Ry,i, and the landing
pcooninntecotfeda cpoemriopdoincebntusbobfle chain, call?it By,i. Let {W1, W2,. .. , Wp} be the set of
we assume that ?Wp contains ?frbUf . By adding more periodic points we can also
assume that c0 ? ?Wp. Set
W := W1? W2?···? Wp?1.
By Schwarz lemma, f | W is expanding with respect to the hyperbolic metric of
W. Since c0 ? ?Wp, there is a sequence of periodic points x`,j ? Jlfoc such that the
orbit of x` is in W and such that x`,j converges from the left to the unique point
x1 in ?1 ? ?Zf.
We claim that the external rays R`,j landing at x`,j converge to the external ray
landing at x1. Indeed, since x`,j ? x1, the external angle of R`,j (see §2.1) converges
to the external angle of R1. By continuity, R`,j([0, T]) converges to R1([0, T]) for
any T ? R>0. Since f | W is expanding, R`,j([T, +?)) is in a small neighborhood
of x`,j which converges to x1.
The bubble chains B`,j of Klfoc landing at x`,j shrink because there are no big
limbs in a neighborhood of x1. De?ne I`,j to be the internal ray of Zf landing at
the point where B`,j is attached. Then R`,j?B`,j?I`,j is a required approximation
for su?ciently big j. Similarly, R? ? B?? I? is constructed.
3.5. Hybrid equivalence. Recall §2 that a pacman f : Uf ? Vfis required to
have a locally analytic extension through ?Uf. By means of the Pullback Argument,
we will now show the following.
Theorem 3.11. Let f : Uf ? Vf and g : Ug ? Vg be two combinatorially equivalent
Siegel pacmen and suppose that f and g have the same truncation level. Then f
and g are hybrid equivalent.
Proof. Let p be the unique quadratic polynomial with the same rotation number
as f and g. Let hf and hg be hybrid conjugacies from neighborhoods of Zf and
Zg to a neighborhood of Zp respectively. As in Corollary 3.7, there are prepacmen
Q, R, S in the dynamical planes of p, f, and g respectively such that hf and hg
are conjugacies respecting prepacmen R, Q and S, Q respectively, see De?nition 2.4.
The composition h := h?g 1 ? hf is a conjugacy respecting R,S.
As in (3.4) we de?ne Klfoc, similarly Klgoc and Klpoc are de?ned. Then h conjugates
As in Lemma 3.10 let R`(f)? B`(f) ? I`(f) and R?(f) ? B?(f)? I?(f) be ap-
proximations of ?1(f) from the left and from the right respectively. Similarly, let
R`(g) ? B`(g) ? I`(g) and R?(g)? B?(g)? I?(g) be approximations of ?1(g). We
choose the approximations in the compatible ways:
• B`(g), I`(g),B?(g), I?(g) are the image of B`(f), I`(f),B?(f), I?(f ) under
h;
• R`(g), R?(g) have the same external angles as R`(f), R?(f).
??Write
Then Tf and Tg are forward invariant sets such that Vf \ Tf and Vg \ Tg consist
of ?nitely many connected components. Since R`(g),R?(g) have the same external
angles, we can extend h to a qc map h: Vf ? Vg such that h is equivariant on
We now slightly increase Uf by moving ?frbUf so that the new disk Uf satis?es
f(?frbUf) ? Zf ? B` ? R`? B? ? R?.
(Indeed, we can slightly move ?? ? ?frbUf so that its image is within R` ? B`?Zf
and we can slightly move ?+ ? ?frbUf so that its image is within R` ? B` ? Zf .)
Similarly, we slightly increase Ug by moving ?frbUg so that the new disk Ug satis?es
g(?frbUg) ? Zg ? B`? R` ? B? ? R?
and such that h | Tf lifts to a conjugacy between f | ?Uf and g | ?Ug. This allows
us to apply the Pullback Argument: we{set h0 := h and we construct qc maps
g?1 ? hn?1 ? f(x)if x ? Uf ,hn : Vf ? Vg by hn(x) :=
if x ?/ Uf .hn?1(x)
We can choose h such that h0 and h1 are connected by an isotopy h? : [0, 1]×Vf ? Vg
that is constant on Tf and uniformly continuous in the hyperbolic metrics of Vf\Tf ,
Vg \ Tg. This implies that the Euclidean distance between hn and hn+1 tends to 0.
Since the space of qc maps with uniformly bounded dilatation is compact, we may
pass to the limit and construct a hybrid conjugacy between f and g.
3.6. Standard Siegel pacmen. We say a Siegel pacman is standard if ?0 passes
through the critical value; equivalently if ?1 passes through the image of the critical
value.
A standard prepacman R in the dynamical plane of a Siegel map g is a prepacman
around (see §3.2) the critical value of g. Then the pacman r obtained from R is a
standard and the renormalization change of variables ?R respects the internal ray
towards the critical value:
(3.5)?R(I1(g)) = I1(r).
The pacman renormalization associated with R is called a standard pacman renor-
malization of g.
By Theorem 3.11, two standard Siegel pacmen are hybrid equivalent if and only
if they have the same rotation number.
Theorem 3.12. Let f be a standard Siegel pacman. Then Kf is locally connected.
Moreover, for every ? > 0 there is an n ? 0 such that every connected component
of Kf minus all of the bubbles with generation at most n is less than ?.
As a consequence, every periodic point of Jf is the landing point of a bubble chain.
Proof. For every ? ? ?bnd, there is a Standard pacman g with rotation number ?
such that is g is a renormalization of a quadratic polynomial. The statement now
follows from Theorem 3.11 combined with Lemma 3.8.
3.7. A ?xed point under renormalization. Consider a Siegel map f with ro-
tation number ? ? ?per and consider x ? ?Zfsuch that x is neither the critical
Let (fa | X?,x ,fb | X+,x) be the sector pre-point nor its iterated preimage.
renormalization of f | ZfSince ? ? ?per, we can assumeas in De?nition 3.5.
(see §A.4) that the renormalization ?xes f | Zf : the gluing map ?x : Xx ? Zf
projects (fa | X?,x ,fb | X+,x) back to f | Zf. For x? {c0, c1} we write
?0 = ?c0,X0 = Xc0,X±,0 = X±,c0
?1 = ?c1,X1 = Xc1,X±,1 = X±,c1.
Theorem 3.13 ([McM2]). For every ? ? ?per, there is a Siegel map g? : U? ? V?
with rotation number ? such that for a certain sector pre-renormalization of g? | Zg?
as above the gluing map ?0 extends analytically through ?Z???X0 to a gluing map
?M0orperoovjeecr,tinthger(ega?is |anS?im,0p,?rovgeb?m|enSt+o,0f)thbeacdko?mtoaign?::tUhe? f?orwVa?rd, worhbeirtes S±,0 ? U?.
g?i (S?,0)g?j(S+,0)
are compactly contained in U? ? V?.
We note that the improvement of the domain follows from complex a priori bounds
for quasicritical circle maps [AL2, §3.3] after applying the inverse Douady-Ghys
surjery; see also [Ya, Proposition 3.2]. Up to conformal conjugacy, g? is unique in a
neighborhood of Zg?. The improvement of the domain will allow us in Theorem 3.16
to construct a pacman analytic self-operator R: B 99K B.
Corollary 3.14. The gluing map ?1 extends analytically through ?Zg?? ?X1 and,
up to replacing ?1 with its iterate, satis?es the same properties as ?0 in Theo-
rem 3.13; in particular, the improvement of the domain holds for ?1.
Proof. We need to check that ?1 := g?? ?0? g?? 1 is well de?ned. Since ?0 projects
(ogb?at,aginb?)tthoatg?foarndz scilnocsee tthoecm1 atphse gga?lu, ginb?garmeatpwo?-0tom-oanpesing??a1n(zei)ghtoboarhpoaoidr ooff cp0o,inwtes
that have the same g?-image. This shows that ?1 is well de?ned. Up to replacing
?1 with its iterate we can guarantee that the improvement of the domain holds for
?1.
? ?X1 because ?1 | Zg?Note that ?1 is expanding on Zg?is conjugate to
z ? z1/t,D1 ? D1,t > 1.
Lemma 3.15 (Fixed Siegel pacman). For any ? ? ?per there is a standard Siegel
pacman f? : U? ? V? that has a standard Siegel prepacman
F? = (f?a | U? ? S?,f?b | U+ ? S?)
together with a gluing map ?? : S? ? V ? projecting F? back to f?. Moreover, the
improvement of the domain holds for the renormalization:
b f??1(U?).F?(3.6)
(See §2.3 for the de?nition of F?.)
The pacman f? is conformally conjugate to g? in a neighborhood of Z? := Zf?.
Proof. Consider a Siegel map g? from Theorem 3.13 and ?1 from Corollary 3.14.
By Corollary 3.7, g? has a standard prepacman Q: UQ,± ? SQ such that SQ\Zg?
is in a small neighborhood of c1. Since ? is of periodic type, we can prescribe Q
to have rotation number ?. Since ?1 is expanding on ?Zg?, for a su?ciently big
integer t ? 1 the prepacman
(?1t)?(Q) := (??1 t ? q± ? ?1t : ?1?t(UQ,±) ? ?1?t(SQ))
has the property that ?1?t(SQ)\ Zg?is in a much smaller neighborhood of c1.
The prepacman (?t1)?(Q)? V? be a pacman obtained from Q.Let f?: U?
projects to the standard prepacman, call it
F?: (f?,± : U?,± ? S?)
such that S? \ Zf?The map ?t1 descents to ais in a small neighborhood of c1.
gluing map, call it ??, projecting F? back to f?.
is compactly contained in f??1(U?).If t is su?ciently big, then F?
3.8. Analytic renormalization self-operator. Applying Theorem 2.7 to f? from
Lemma 3.15 we obtain
Theorem 3.16 (Analytic operator R: B 99K B). Let f? : U? ? V? be a pacman
and F? be a prepacman from Lemma 3.15.Then there are small neighborhoods
NU?(f?, ?), NU? (f?,?) of f? with ? < ? and there is an analytic pacman renormal-
ization operator R: NU? (f?,?) ? NU?(f?, ?) such that Rf? = f?.Moreover, the
operator R is compact, so its spectrum is a sequence converging to 0. The pre-
renormalization of Rf? is F?.
Proof. Let f? : U? ? V ? be a pacman obtained form f? : U?? V? by slightly
decreasing U? so that U? b U? and F?b f??1(U ?). Since the renormalization is
de?ned on F?, by Theorem 2.7 there is a compact analytic pacman renormalization
oclpoesruarteosroNf U?U?(?fa?n,?d)U??.NPU?r(efc?o,m?)p,owsihnegrewU?it?hatnhde U?resatrreicstmioanllonpeeirgahtboorrNhoU?o(dfs?,o?f)th?e
NU??(f?, ?), we obtain the required operator R.
To simplify notations, we will often write an operator in Theorem 3.16 as R: B 99K
B with B = NU? (f?,?). We can assume (by Lemma 3.4) that f? has any given trun-
cation level between 0 and 1.
Corollary 3.17. In a small neighborhood of f?, the operator R : B 99K B has
an analytic ?nite-dimensional unstable submanifold Wutangent to the unstable
direction of R.
We will show in Theorem 7.7 that Wu has dimension 1.
Proof. Since R is compact, it has a ?nite-dimensional unstable direction.
[HPS, Corollary (5.4)] asserts that Wu exists as a C?-smooth submanifold.
The corollary is proven by showing that the graph transform on the space of sub-
manifolds in a su?ciently small cone-neighborhood of the unstable direction of R
(i.e. “candidates” toWu) has the unique ?xed pointWu. In our analytic setup, the
graph transform iteratively applied to an analytic submanifold gives a sequence of
analytic submanifolds converging exponentially fast and uniformly to Wu (see the
estimate on page 55 of [HPS]). Therefore, Wu is an analytic submanifold.
An indi?erent pacman is a pacman with indi?erent ?-?xed point. The rotation
number of an indi?erent pacman f is ? ? R/Z so that e(?) is the multiplier at ?(f).
If, moreover, ? ? Q, then f is parabolic.
We denote by ?? the multiplier of f?.
L(3e.7m)ma 3.18. Let RprmR:prRm/(Z?)?= R????/Z12???b?e?1the miiff a01p??de????n?ed121,by
?2
Then there is a k ? 1 such that the following holds.Let f ? B besee (A.2).
an indi?erent pacman with rotation number ?. Then Rf is again an indi?erent
pacman with rotation number Rkprm(?).
In particular, Rpkrm(??) = ??.
Proof. Recall that the renormalization R of f? is an extension of a sector renor-
malization of f | Z?, see De?nition 3.5 and Appendix A. By Lemma A.2, a sector
renormalization is an iteration of the prime renormalization. Therefore, R is an
iteration of the prime pacman renormalization Rprm, see De?nition 2.3. We need
to check that if f is an indi?erent pacman with rotation number ?, then Rprmf
is again an indi?erent pacman with rotation number Rprm(?). By continuity, it is
su?cient to assume that f is a parabolic pacman with rotation number p/q. Then
f has q local attracting petals in a small neighborhood of ?. If p ? q/2, then
Rprm deletes p local attracting petals; otherwise Rprm deletes q?p local attracting
petals. We see that Rprmf has rotation number Rprm(p/q).
Remark 3.19. We will show in [DL] that R : B 99K B can be constructed so that
k is the minimal period of ?? under Rprm.
R: B 99K B,Rf? = f?
from Theorem 3.16 around a ?xed Siegel pacman f?. By Corollary 3.17 R has an
unstable manifold Wu at f?.
4.1. Renormalization triangulations. Suppose that f0 ? B is renormalizable
n ? 0 times (this is always the case if f0 is su?ciently close to f?) and anti-
renormalizable ?m ? 0 times. We write [fk : Uk ? V ] := Rkf0 for the kth (anti-
) renormalization of f0, where m ? k ? n.? V theWe denote by ?k : Sk
renormalization change of variables realizing the renormalization of fk?1 (compare
with the left side of Figure 21). We write
?k := ?k?1.
Let us cut the dynamical plane of fk: Uk ? V , with k ? {m, .. ., n}, along ?1;
we denote the resulting prepacman by
Fk = (fk,±: Uk,± ? V \ ?1) .(4.1)
Lemma 4.1. By restricting R to a smaller neighborhood of f?, the following is
true. Suppose f0 is renormalizable n? 1 times. Then the map
?n := ?1 ? ?2? ···? ?n
admits a conformal extension from a neighborhood of c1(fn) (where ?n is de?ned
canonically) to V \ ?1. The map ?n : V \ ?1 ? V embeds the prepacman Fn (4.1)
to the dynamical plane o(f f0; we denote the)embedding by
where the numbers an, bn are the renormalization return times satisfying (A.4).
Let n be the triangulation obtained by spreading around Un(0,)? and Un(0,+) , see§2.3
and Figure 7. In the dynamical plane of f0 we have
1(f0) is close in Hausdor? topology to 1(f?), and moreover f0(n) b n?1.
We call n the nth renormalization triangulation. Examples of 0, 1, 2 are shown
in Figures 14 and 15. We say that n(f0) is the full lift of n?1(f1). Similarly (i.e. by
lifting and then spreading around), a full lift will be de?ned for other objects.
In the proof of Lemma 4.1 we need to deal with the fact that ?1(?1) can spiral
around ?, see Figure 13 for illustration.We will ?rst show in Lemma 4.2 that
Lemma 4.1 holds in a neighborhood of ?Z?. By the topological robustness of anti-
renormalization (Theorem B.8), Lemma 4.1 holds also inside Z?.
4.1.1. Combinatorics of triangles. Before giving the proof of Lemma 4.1, let us
introduce additional notations. For consistency, we set ?0 := id; then 0 = U0 is
a triangulation consisting of two closed triangles – the closures of the connected
components of U0 \ (?0 ? ?1).We denote these triangles by ?0(0) and ?0(1)
so that int(?0(0)), ?0, int(?0(1)) have counterclockwise orientation around ?, see
Figure 14. The triangulation 0(fn) is de?ned similarly.
Let ?n(0,f0), ?n(1, f0) be the images of ?0(0,fn), ?0(1, fn) via the map ?n
from Lemma 4.1. By de?nition, n is a triangulated neighborhood of ? obtained
by spreading around ?n(0,f0), ?n(1, f0). We enumerate in counterclockwise order
these triangles as ?n(i) with i ? {0,1, .. ., qn?1}. By construction, ?n(0)??n(1) 3
c1(fn).
We remark that f0 | n is an anti-renormalization of fn : Un ? V in the sense
of Appendix A. Moreover, there is a pn such that
f0: ?n(i) ? ?n(i + pn)(4.2)
is conformal for all i ? {?pn,?pn + 1} with the index taken modulo qn. For the
exceptional triangles, we have an almost two-to-one map
f0 : ?n(?pn)? ?n(?pn + 1) ? S(0n) ? ?n(0)? ?n?(1).(4.3)
We will show in Theorem 4.6 that if f0 is close to f?, then n =?n(i) approxi-
Figure 13. Suppose f(z) = ?z with ? ? R+ and let S be the
sector between ?0 and ?1 = f(?0). Let ?: S ? C be the gluing
map identifying dynamically ?0 and ?1. If |?| 6= 1, then ?(?0) does
not land at 0 at a well de?ned angle.
By construction, for every triangle ?n(i,f0) there is a t ? 0 and j ? {0, 1} such
that a certain branch of f0?t maps conformally ?n(i, f0) to ?n(j, f0). We de?ne
?n,i on ?n(i, f0) by
?n,i := ??n1 ? f0?t : ?n(i,f0) ? ?0(j,fn).(4.4)
4.1.2. Walls. Let A be a closed annulus, and let O be the bounded component of
C\ A. We say that A is a univalent N-wall if the restriction f0 | O?A is univalent
and for all z ? O and all j with |j|? N we have
(f0 | O ? A)j(z) ? O ? A.
More generally, we say that A is an N -wall if A contains a univalent N-wall A?
such that O is in the bounded component of C \ A?.
Fix a small r > 0 and denote by Z?r the open subdisk of Z? bounded by the
equipotential at height r. Set 0 := U0\Z?r. It is a closed annulus enclosing ?. We
decompose 0 into two closed rectangles ?0(0) = 0??0(0) and ?0(1) = 0??0(1);
they are the closures of the connected components of 0 \ (?0 ? ?1). The following
lemma proves that the wall of n exists.
Lemma 4.2 (The wall of n). Suppose all f0,f1, . . ., fn are in a small neighborhood
of f?. Then there exists a wall n(f0) with the following properties.
(1) The map ?n extends from a neighborhood of c1(fn) to 0 \ ?1;
(2) Let ?n(0, f0) and ?n(1,f0) be the images of ?0(0, fn) and ?0(1, fn) under
?n. Then, by spreading around ?n(0,f0) and ?n(1, f1), we obtain an an-
nulus n enclosing ?. We enumerate counterclockwise rectangles in n as
?n(i) with i ? {0, 1, .. ., qn? 1}.
(3) We have 0 c 1 c ··· c n with 0(f0) close to 0(f?).
(4) For every ?n(i), there is a t ? 0 such that a certain branch of fn?t maps
?n(i) onto ?n(j) with j ? {0,1}. Then
?n,i := ??n1 ? f0?t : ?n(i,f0) ? ?0(j,fn).(4.5)
is conformal. If n is su?ciently big, then all ?n,i expand the Euclidean
metric and the expanding constant is at least ?n for a ?xed ? > 1.In
particular, the diameters of the rectangles in n tend to 0.
(5) The wall n(f0) approximates ?Z? in the following sense: ?Z? is a con-
catenation of arcs J0J1 . .. Jqn?1 such that ?n(i) and Ji are close in the
Hausdor? topology.
As with renormalization triangulation, we say that n(f0) is the full lift of n?1(f1).
Proof. The proof follows from the robustness of the renormalization change of vari-
ables in a neighborhood of ?Z?. Such change of variables is eventually expanding.
Consider ?rst the case f0 = f1 = ··· = fn = f?. It follows from the improvement
of the domain that the wall n(f?) is well de?ned and, moreover, the diameters
of the rectangles in n(f?) tend to 0 as n increases. Choosing a su?ciently big k
and applying the Schwarz lemma (after a slight enlargement of the rectangles), we
obtain that all the ?k,i: ?k(i,f?)? ?0(j, f?) expand the Euclidean metric.
By continuity and the assumption that f0, f1,. .. , fn are su?ciently close to f?,
the maps ?k,i : ?k(i,fs) ? ?0(j, fs+k) also expand the Euclidean metric.De-
composing ?n,i : ?n(i, f0) ? ?0(j, fn) into a composition of bnkc maps of the
form ?k,t and one remaining map, we see that ?n,i : ?n(i, f0) ? ?0(j, fn) is a
required expanding map. This implies Claim (4); other claims are consequences of
Claim (4).
4.1.3. Proof of Lemma 4.1. We will now apply Theorem B.8 to show that the full
lift n(f0) of 0(fn) exists.
Let Q0 ? Z? be the closed annulus bounded by the equipotentials at heights r
and 2r. Then Q0 ? 0 and we decompose Q0 into two rectangles Q0(0) = ?0(0)?Q0
and Q0(1) = ?0(1)?Q0. Let Qn(0, f0) and Qn(1, f0) be the images of Q0(0, fn) and
Q0(1,fn) under ?n. By spreading around Qn(0, f0) and Qn(1, f0), we obtain (by
Lemma 4.2) an annulus Qn enclosing ?. We enumerate counterclockwise rectangles
in Qn as Qn(i) with i ? {0, 1, .. ., qn? 1}. We have Qn(i) ? ?n(i).
Denote by ?n the open topological disk enclosed by Qn. Then f0 | ?n?Qn is an
anti-renormalization of f1 | ?n?1? Qn?1 (in the sense of Appendix B) with respect
to the dividing pair of curves ?0, ?1.
By induction, we will now extend the wall n to the triangulation n. Suppose
the statement is veri?ed for n ? 1. In the dynamical plane of f1, we denote by
?(0n?1) the lift of ?0(fn) under the (n? 1)-anti-renormalization speci?ed so that
(n?1)crosses Qn?1 at Qn?1(0)? Qn?1(1). Note that Qn(0)? Qn(1) is in a small
?0
neighborhood of c1 because ?n is contracting. Therefore, ?0(n?1)?Qn?1 is uniformly
close to ?0 ? Qn?1. We can sightly adjust ?0 in a neighborhood of Qn?1, such that
the new ?0new crosses Qn?1 at Qn?1(0)?Qn?1(1). Let ?(1n?1) and ?1new be the images
of ?(0n?1) and ?0new respectively. Since a wall contains a fence (see Remark B.10),
by Theorem B.8 the anti-renormalization of f1 | ?n?1 ? Qn?1with respect to
?(0n?1), ?(1n?1) is naturally conjugate to the corresponding anti-renormalization of
f1 | ?n?1 ? Qn?1 with respect to ?0new,?n1ew.Therefore, the full lift n(f0) of
n?1(f1) exists; n(f0) is a required triangulation of n ? ?n.
n, Bwye o(3b.t6a)incofm0(binne+d1)wbithnco. nt(inuity, we have f0()1) ? 0. Applying induction on
fn(0,±) : Un(0,±) ? Sn(0)We can now de?ne Fn(0) =as the lift of Fn (see (4.1)) to
the dynamical plane of f0, where
S(n0) := f0 (?n(?pn)? ?n(?pn + 1))

4.1.4. Changing ?1. In fact, the exact behavior of ?1 in a small neighborhood of ?
is irrelevant in the proof of Lemma 4.1. We have
Lemma 4.3. Let ?n0ew, ?1new = fn(?0new) be a new pair of curves in the dynamical
plane of fn such that
• ?0new and ?1new are disjoint away from ?.
Then Lemma 4.1 still holds after replacing ?0,?1 with ?n0ew, ?n1ew. More pre-
cisely, let ?n0ew(0, fn),?n0ew(1,fn) be the closures of the connected components of
U0 \ (?0new ? ?n1ew) in the dynamical plane of fn. As in Lemma 4.1 the map ?n
extends from a neighborhood of c1(fn) to V \ ?n1ew; let ?nnew(0, f0), ?nnew(1,f0) be
the images of ?n0ew(0,fn), ?n0ew(1, fn) under the new ?n.By spreading around
?nnew(0,f0), ?nnew(1, f0) we obtain a new triangulated neighborhood nnew of ?.
Note that nnew and n triangulate the same neighborhood of ?.
Proof. Since ?1new, ?n0ew coincide with ?1, ?0 outside Zr, the wall n is una?ected;
thus we can repeat the proof of Lemma 4.1 for ?n1ew.
4.1.5. Siegel triangulations. We will also consider triangulations that are perturba-
tions of n. Let us introduce appropriate notations. Consider a pacman f ? B.
A Siegel triangulation  is a triangulated neighborhood of ? consisting of closed
triangles, each has a vertex at ?, such that
• triangles of  are {?(i)}i?{0,...q} enumerated counterclockwise around ? so
that ?(i) is attached to ?(i? 1) (on the right) and to ?(i + 1) (on the
left); all other pairs of triangles are disjoint away from ?;
• there is a p > 0 such that f maps ?(i) to ?(i +p) for all i ? {?p,?p + 1},
while f(?(?p,?p + 1))?  = ?(0,1);
•  has a distinguished 2-wall  enclosing ? and containing ? such that
each ?(i) :=  ? ?(i) is connected and f maps ?(i) to ?(i + p) for all
i ? {?p,?p + 1}; and
•  contains a univalent 2-wall Q such that each Q(i) := Q??(i) is connected
and f maps Q(i) to Q(i + p) for all i? {?p,?p + 1}.
The nth renormalization triangulation is an example of a Siegel triangulation.
Similar to Lemma 4.2, Part (5), we say that  approximates ?Z? if ?Z? is a
concatenation of arcs J0J1 .. . Jq?1 such that ?(i) and Ji are close in the Hausdor?
topology.
Lemma 4.4. Let f ? B be a pacman such that all f,Rf,. .. ,Rnf are in a small
neighborhood of f?. Let (Rnf) be a Siegel triangulation in the dynamical plane of
Rnf such that (Rnf) approximates ?Z?. Then (Rnf) has a full lift (f ) which
is again a Siegel triangulation. Moreover, (f) also approximates ?Z?.
Proof. It is similar to the proof of Lemma 4.1.Suppose ?rst n = 1.Since all
?(i,Rf) are small, the arc ?0 can be slightly adjusted2 in a neighborhood of  so
that ?0 crosses  along ?(i,Rf)? ?(i + 1,Rf) with i? {?p,?p + 1}. This allows
us to construct a full lift (f) of (Rf). By Corollary B.13, the annuli (f) and
Q(f) are again 2-walls. Applying Theorem B.8 from Appendix B we construct a
Figure 14. Renormalization tiling. Right: triangles ?0(0), ?0(1)
are the closures of the connected components of Uf \ (?0 ? ?1).
They form a renormalization tiling of level 0.Left: the trian-
gles labeled by 0 and 1, i.e. ?1(0, f) and ?1(1,f) respectively, are
anti-renormalization embeddings of ?0(0,f1), ?0(1, f1); the for-
ward orbit of ?1(0,f), ?1(1, f ) triangulates a neighborhood of ?.
Together with A0(0)? A0(1), this gives a tiling of Uf of level 1.
full lift (f) of (Rf). Lemma 4.2 Part (4) allows to apply induction on n: for big
n, the wall (f) approximates ?Z? better than (Rnf) approximates ?Z?.
4.2. Renormalization tilings. In this subsection we will show the robustness of
renormalization triangulations. Along the lines we will also extend n(f) to a tiling
of Uf.
Let ?0? be the preimage of ?1 \ Uf under f : ??0 ? ??1, see Figure 14. In other
words, ?0? is the subcurve of ??0 consisting of points that escape Uf after one itera-
tion. Set ?(f) := ?Uf ? ??0(f).
Lemma 4.5. For every i we have
?1,i(?1(f0)? ??1(i, f0))? ?(f).
Moreover, there is an i such that ??0 ? ?1,i(?1(f0) ? ??1(i, f0)). The set ?(f) is
disjoint from 0(f ).
There are disjoint arcs ?0 and ?1 = f(?0) such that
• the concatenation of ??0 and ?0 connects ?0 to ?1; and
• ?1 connects ?0 to ?1.
In a small neighborhood of f? the curves ?0, ?1 can be chosen so that there is a
holomorphic motion of
[1 ? ?0 ? ?0?? ?0 ? ?1] (f0)(4.6)
that is equivariant with the following maps
(1) f0 : ?0(f0) ? ?1(f0);
(2) f0 : ?1(i,f0)? ?1(i + p1,f0) for i ? {?p1,?p1 + 1};
(3) ?1,i : ?1(f0) ? ?1(i, f0) ? ?(f1).
Proof. Each triangle ?1(i) has three distinguished closed sides; we denote them by
?(i), ?(i), and `(i) such that ?(i) and ?(i) are the left and right sides meeting at
the ?-?xed point while `(i) is the oppo(site to ? side.)We(have:)
?1(f0)? ??1(i, f0)) = `i ? ?(i)4?(i + 1) ? ?(i)4?(i? 1) ,
where ?(i)4?(i + 1) is the symmetri?c di?erence between ?(i) and ?(i + 1). Note
that ?1,i(`(i)) ? ?0 and, moreover,?1,i(`(i)) = ?0.
Let us analyze ?(i)4?(i + 1). We assume that ?(i) 6= ?(i + 1). Then one of the
c?u1(rfv1es).inW{e?h(ia)v,e?:(i + 1)} is a??1-,ip(r?e(imi)4ag?e(oi f+?10)()f1=) w?0h?.ile the other is a preimage of
It is clear (see Appendix A) that ?(i) 6= ?(i + 1) for at least one i.
The property ?(f)? ?1(f) = ? follows from ?0 ? f(1) = ?, see Lemma 4.1.
Since ?(f)??1(f) = ?, we can ?nd ?0 such that ?0???0 is in a small neighborhood
oisf ?d0isjaonidnt?f0?r?om?0?c?0o?nn?e0ctasn?d?01toco?n(ne1c\t(s??1(0?tpo1)???1.1(?p1?1))). Then ?1 = f(?0)
In a small neighborhood of f? we have a holomorphic motion of ?0(f0). Ap-
plying the ?-lemma, we obtain a holomorphic motion of the triangulation 0 that
is equivariant with f0 | ?0. Lifting this motion via ?1,i, we obtain a holomorphic
motion of 1 ? ? equivariant with (2) and (3). Applying again the ?-lemma, we
extend the latter motion to the motion of (4.6) that is also equivariant with (1).
Let A0 be the closed annulus between ?0 and ?1. The arcs ?0? ? ?0, ?1 split
A0 into two closed rectangles A0(0),A0(1) (see Figure 14) enumerated such that
int(A0(0)),??0 ? ?0,int(A0(1)), ?1 have counterclockwise orientation.
Let An be the closed annulus between ?n and ?n+1. De?ne
An(0, f0) := ?n(A0(0, fn))An(1,f0) := ?n(A0(1,fn))and
and spread dynamically An(0, f0), An(1, f0) (compare with the de?nition of ?n(i)
in §4.1); we obtain the partition of An(f0) by rectangles {An(i,f0)}0?i<qnenu-
merated counterclockwise. Similar to (4.5) we de?ne the map ?n,i : An(i, f0) ?
A0(j, fn) with j ? {0,1}.
The nth renormalization tiling is the union of all the triangles of n and the
union of all the rectangles of all Am for all m < n. The nth renormalization tiling
is de?ned as long as f0, .. . , fn are in a small neighborhood of f?.
A qc combinatorial pseudo-conjugacy of level n between f0 and f? is a qc map
h : U0 ? U? that is compatible with the nth renormalization tilings as follows:
• h maps ?n(i, f0) to ?n(i, f?) for all i;
• h maps Am(i,f0) to Am(i, f?) for all i and m < n;
• h is equivariant on ?n(i,f0) for all i? {?pn,?pn + 1}; and
• h is equivariant on Am(i, f0) for all i ? {?pm,?pm + 1} and m < n.
The following theorem says that f | n(f) approximates f? | Z? both dynami-
cally and geometrically.
Theorem 4.6 (Combinatorial pseudo-conjugacy). Consider an nth renormalizable
pacman f and set
If d is su?ciently small, then there is a qc combinatorial pseudo-conjugacy h
of level n between f and f? and, moreover, the following properties hold. The qc
Figure 15. Renormalization tiling of level 2; tilings of smaller
levels are depicted on Figure 14. There are q2 = 12 triangles in 2
with rotation number p2/q2 = 5/12. Geometry of triangles in 2
is simpli?ed. The image of ?2(8)??2(9) is a sector slightly bigger
than ?2(0)? ?2(1) – compare with Figure 7.
dilatation and the distance between h | n(f) and the identity on n(f) are bounded
by constants K(d), M(d) respectively with K(d) ? 1 and M(d) ? 0 as d ? 0.
Proof. By Lemma 4.5, the set (4.6) moves holomorphically with f in a small neigh-
borhood of f?. Applying the ?-lemma, we obtain a holomorphic motion ? of the
?rst renormalization tiling with f in a small neighborhood U of f?.
Suppose now that d is so small that all fi := Rif are in U. For every ?n(i)
of f0 or of f? consider the map ?n,i : ?n(i) ? ?0(j), where ?0(j) is the corre-
sponding triangle of fn or of f?. Then h on ?n(i,f0) is de?ned by applying ?rst
?n,i: ?n(i, f0) ? ?0(j, fn) (see (4.4)), then applying the motion ? from ?0(j, fn)
to ?0(j, f?), and then applying ??n,1i : ?0(j, f?) ? ?n(i,f?).
Similarly, for every Am(i) of f0 or of f? consider the map ?m,i: Am(i)? A0(j),
where A0(j) is the corresponding rectangle of fm or of f?. Then h on Am(i, f0) is
de?ned by applying ?rst ?m,i: Am(i,f0)? A0(j,fm), then applying the motion ?
from Am(j, f0) to Am(j, f?), and then applying ??m1,i : A0(j, f?) ? Am(i, f?).
Observe now that h is well de?ned for all the points on the boundaries of all
the rectangles and all the triangles because ? is equivariant with (1), (2), (3) – see
Lemma 4.5. Therefore, all points have well de?ned images under h.
with i ?The qc dilatation of h is bounded by the qc dilatation of ? at fi
{0, 1,. .. ,n}. This bounds the qc dilatation of h by K(d) as above with K(d) ? 1
as d ? 0.
If n = 1, then since ? is continuous, the distance between h | 1(f0) and the
identity on 1(f0) is bounded by M(d) as required. If n > 1, then n(f0) b U0 and
the claim follows from the compactness of qc maps with bounded dilatation
Corollary 4.7. There is an ? > 0 with the following property. Suppose that f ?B
is in?nitely renormalizable and that all Rnf for n ? 0 are in the ?-neighborhood
of f?. Then there is a qc map h: Uf ? U? such that h?1 is a conjugacy on Z?.
Therefore, a certain restriction of f is a Siegel map and f,f? are hybrid conjugate
on neighborhoods of their Siegel disks.
Proof. If ? is su?ciently small, then by Theorem 4.6, for every n ? 0 there exists
qc combinatorial pseudo-conjugacy hn of level n between f and f? such that the
dilation of hn is uniformly bounded for all n. By compactness of qc maps, we may
pass to the limit and construct a qc map h: Uf ? U? such that h?1 is a conjugacy
on Z? and c0(f) ? h?1(Z?). It follows, in particular, that f is a Siegel map. By
Theorem 3.6, the maps f, f? are hybrid conjugate on neighborhoods of their Siegel
disks.
4.3. Control of pullbacks. Recall from Lemma 4.1 that an,bn denote the closest
renormalization return times computed by (A.4). By de?nition, an + bn = qn. We
now restrict out attention to f ? Wu.
Key Lemma 4.8. There is a small open topological disk D around c1(f?) and
there is a small neighborhood U ? Wuof f?such that the following property
For every su?ciently big n ? 1, for each t ? {an,bn}, and for all f ?holds.
R?n(U), we have c1+t(f) := f t(c1)? D and D can be pulled back along the orbit
c1(f), c2(f),. .. ,c1+t(f) ? D to a disk D0 such that ft : D0 ? D is a branched
covering; moreover, D0 ? Uf \ ?1.
Proof. The main idea of the proof is to block the forbidden part of the boundary
?frbUf from the backward orbit of D. The proof is split into short subsections. We
start the proof by introducing conventions and additional terminology. The central
argument will be presented in Claim 10, Part (4).
4.3.1. The triangulated disk  approximates Z?. Throughout the proof we will often
say that a certain object is small if it has small size independently of n. Choose a
big s  0 and choose a small neighborhood U of f? such that every f ? R?n(U)
is at least m := n + s renormalizable and each fi := Rif with i ? {0,1, . .. ,m} is
close to f?.
Consider the m-th renormalization triangulation ?m(i) of f. Let h be a qc com-
binatorial pseudo-conjugacy of level m as in Theorem 4.6. To keep notation simple,
we sometimes drop the subindex m and write ?(i), ,q, p for ?m(i), m, qm, pm.
Since fi with i ?{0, 1, . . ., m} are close to f?, the map h |  is close to the identity
(by Theorem 4.6). In particular, (f) = h?1((f?)) approximates Z?. Since s is
big and since ai, bi have exponential growth with the same exponent (A.4), we have
Figure 16. If Dj intersects S = ?(0)??(1) and S is disjoint from
?(I), then Dj?1 may intersect \?(f?1(I)) because f() = ?S.
3 fk(c1). For convenience, we will write c?0 = c0(f?) and c?14.3.2. Disks Dk=
Let us show that D 3 ft(c1).c1(f?).Consider ?rst the dynamical plane of f?.
Since n is big, we see that f?an(c?1),f?bn(c?1) are arbitrary close to c?1; i.e. D 3 f?t(c1).
It follows from (4.7) that
min{am, bm}? 1 > max{an, bn}? t.(4.8)
This shows that c?1, . . . ,f?t(c?1) do not visit triangles ?(?pm, f?) ? ?(?pm + 1, f?)
as it takes either am ? 1 or bm ? 1 iterations for a point in ?(0, f?) ? ?(1,f?) to
visit them. Since h is a conjugacy away from ?(?p) ? ?(?p + 1), we obtain that
h?1 maps c?1,. . . , f?t(c?1) to c1,. . ., ft(c1). Since h is close to the identity, ft(c1) is
close to f?t(c?1); thus ft(c1)? D.
Let D0,D1,. .. Dt = D be the pullbacks of D along the orbit c1, .. ., ft(c1) ? D;
i.e. Dt := D 3 ft(c1) and Di is the connected component of f?1(Di+1) containing
fi(c1). Our main objective is to show that the Di do not intersect ?frbUf ; this will
imply that the maps f : Di ? Di+1 are branched coverings for all i ? {0,. .. , t? 1}.
4b.e3r.s3.i,Sie+?cto1r, s..?.,(iI+) ajntdak?e(nI)m. oAdnuliontqe.rvWaleIdoe?f nZe/qthZe isseactsoertpoafracomnestercizuetdivbeynIumas-
?(I) :=i?If??(1i()I.) F:=ur?????thI((eIIr?m??poppr))e,??w{{e?0,lpe1,t}?p + 1} iiifff III ???{{{00p,,, 11p,}+p6=,1p}?+6=1}?.=?
(4.9)
In other words, we require that if I ? p contains one of ?p,?p + 1, then it also
contains the other number; and similarly with pair 0, 1. By (4.2) and (4.3)
Claim 1. The preimage of ?(I) under f |  is within ?(f?1(I)).
Unfortunately, we do not have the property that
then Dj?1 ? ? ?(f?1(I))if Dj ?  ? ?(I),
because the image of ?(?p) ? ?(?p + 1) is slightly bigger than ?(0) ? ?(1),
see (4.3). To handle this issue, we will adjust  to a slightly smaller triangulated
Figure 17. Right: ?0(0, fm) and ?0(1,fm) are shrunk versions
of ?0(0, fm) and ?0(1, fm). Left: by transferring ?0(0, fm) and
?0(1,fm) to ?m(0, f0) and ?m(1,f0) by ?m,0, and spreading these
triangles dynamically, we obtain the triangulated neighborhood m
of ? such that m is a slightly shrunk version of m; compare with
Figures 14 and 15.
neighborhood  such that
 ? fi()? (4.10)
for all i ?{0, 1,. . ., min{am,bm}}.
Consider the dynamical plane of fm = Rmf and let ?0(0,fm) and ?0(1, fm)
be the closures of the connected components of fm?1(Um)\ (?1 ? ?0) attached to ?
such that ?0(0, fm) ? ?0(0, fm) and ?0(1, fm) ? ?0(1,fm), see Figure 17. Writing
0(fm) = ?0(0,fm)??1(1, fm) we obtain a shrunk version of 0(fm). The map ?m
embeds ?0(0, fm) and ?1(1,fm) to the dynamical plane of f0; spreading around the
embedded triangles, we obtain a triangulated neighborhood  of ? such that (4.10)
holds.
Let us also give a slightly di?erent description of . Recall (4.4) that ?0,m maps
each ?m(i, f0) conformally to some ?0(j,fm). Then ?(i) = ?m(i, f0) ? ?m(i, f0)
is the preimage of ?0(j, fm)?under that map. We de??ne
 :=?(i)and?(I) =?(i).
For the same reason as for (f?), the triangulation (f?) approximates Z?. And
since h |  is close to the identity, (f) also approximates Z? in the sense of
Theorem 4.6. For the same reason as for Claim 1, we have:
Claim 2. We have ?(i) = ? ?(i) for every i. The preimage of ?(I) under f | 
is within ?(f?1(I)).
The following claim is a re?nement of (4.10). This will help us to control the
intersections of Dk with .
Claim 3. Let I be an interval. Consider z ? . If fi(z) ? ?(I) for i < min{a,b},
then z ? ?(f?i(I)).
As a consequence, if T ? ? ?(I) for an interval I and a set T ? V , then
f?i(T ) ? ? ?(f?i(I))
Figure 18. The rectangle Sk is an appropriate truncation of ?(Ik)
such that Sk ? Dk ?  and Sk ? (f | )?1(Sk+1).
Proof. Since fi(z) ? ?(I), every preimage of fi(z) under the i-th iterate of f | 
is within ?(f?1(I)) by Claim 1. By Claim 2, z ? ?(f?i(I))?  ? ?(f?i(I)).
The second statement follows from the ?rst because points in  do not escape 
under fi for all i < min{a,b}, see (4.10).
choose ? > 0 such that 1? r is much bigger than ?. Consider an interval Ik for
k ? t and consider i? Ik.
• If for all ` ? {k,k + 1, . .. ,t} we have i + p(`? k) ? {?p,?p + 1}, then
de?ne
Sk(i) := ?(i)\ h?1(Z?r??).
Sk(i). Since ?(Ik, f?) has a small angle at ? (see Claim 4) and
Claim 5. All Sk are small.
Claim 6. For every k ? t, the preimage of Sk+1 under f |  is within Sk.
Proof. By Claim 2 we only need to check that the truncation is respected by back-
ward dynamics. The proof is based on the fact that points in Sk pass at most once
through the critical sector (?p)? (?p +1) under the iteration of f, f2, .. . , f t?k.
The sector Sk consists of subsectors Sk(i), where i ? Ik. If i ? {?p,?p + 1},
then
f : Sk(i) ? Sk+1(i + p)
is a homeomorphism. Suppose i ?{?p,?p+1}. Then Sk+1(i+p) = ?(i)\h?1(Z?r)
because i+ p, .. ., i +p(t?k) are disjoint from {?p,?p +1} by (4.8). On the other
hand, by de?nitioSnkof?Shk?,1((?(?p, f?)? ?(?p + 1,f?))\ Z?r??).
Since h is close to identity (see §4.3.1), the preimage of Sk+1(i + p) under f |  is
within Sk(i) ? Sk.
We can assume that Dt is so small that it does not intersect h?1(Z?r). Then
Dt ?  ? St; using Claims 3 and 6 we obtain Dk ? ? Sk.
Next let us inductively enlarge Dk as Dk ? D?k ? Dk. Set
Dt = D?t := Dt
adconemd?npdeoeDn?enknettosDbo?kfetCtoh\eb(?eDltl?kehd?e-iicnnotnDSn?kke?)c.tiendt Scko;mi.pe.onDekntisoDf ?kf??i1n(tDSkk+p1)lucsoanltlaoifnitnhge bDoku.ndWede
Claim 7. For all k ? t the intersection Dk? is connected and we have Sk = Dk ? .
Proof. Follows from Dk ?  ? Sk, Claim 6, and the de?nition of Dk.
4.3.5. Bubble chains. Below we will separate the forbidden part of the boundary
?frbUffrom all Djby external rays and bubble chains (see Figure 19).Recall
from §3.1 that for f? a bubble chain is a sequence of iterated lifts of Z?; for f the
role of Z? will be played by .
Consider ?rst the dynamical plane of f?.Recall from Theorem 3.12 that the
non-escaping set K? of f? is locally connected and that K? has at most ?nitely
many limbs (and bubbles) with diameter at least ? for every ? > 0. Let Za and
?
Zrebspbeecttiwveolyb.ubLbetlesf?paattbaechtehde tioteZra?tesuocfhf?thsautchZathaantdf?Zpab(Zarae) c=losZe??t.oR?e?caalnl dfro?m+
Figure 19. Separation of ?frbUf from ?. Disks  and ? approx-
imate Z? and Z??. Iterated lifts of ? form periodic bubble chains
Bx and By landing at periodic points x and y. Together with ex-
ternal rays Rx, Ry the bubble chains Bx,By separate ?frbUf from
the critical value. The con?guration is stable because of the sta-
bility of local dynamics at x and y. Disks Dk may intersect ? but,
by Claim 10, they do not intersect Bx ? By \ ?.
De?nition 3.1 that ?1, as well as ?0, is a concatenation of an external ray and an
internal ray. We also recall from §3.6 that we normalized ?0 to pass through the
crofraf?piyatVsi:caR\inl?(tvR(,aZR?lua+e?);.?RwT+eZh)e?d?rc.eeonfnToortthaeeei,nnbtihynWegWacZr?ii??st.tithchLaeeleotpwpoWaeiknnaetwboca?0efkZiteshaeothfauenZndli??av:wnadleteihnnhetgavcppeouonlWilnnbetaaccotbkfedtoWwfcooW?.me?xpBtuoyennrdtnehneatrel
Schwarz lemma, the map fpa : Wa ? W? has a unique ?xed point; we call it x.
Set Z2 := Za and for i ? 2 de?ne Zi+1 to be the unique preimage of Zi under
fpa : Wa ? W ?. By the expansion of f?pa : Wa ? W?, the Zi shrink to x. We have
constructed the bubble chain Bx
?
(4.11)Z1 = Z?, Z2, Z3,. ..
lraenmdoinvigngatZx?.inWBrxit.eTphxen:=pxpaisatnhde dmeinnoitmeabl ypeBri?xod?oBf Bx xthbeecsauubscehfaipnx(oBb?xt)ai=neBdxb.y
Similarly, we de?ne y to be the unique ?xed point of f?pb : Wb ? W ? c Wb and
By to be the bubble chain landing at y. The minimal period of By is py. We have
Bx = f?px(B?x)and By = f?py(B?y),px, py ? 2.(4.12)
We denote by p the least common period of Bx and By.
Since f is close to f?, by Lemma 2.6, periodic rays Rx, Ry exist in the dynamical
plane of f and are close to the corresponding rays in the dynamical plane of f?.
Set ? to be the closure of the connected component of f?1() \  that has a
non-empty intersection with . Then ? is connected and
? ? ? ?(?p)? ?(?p + 1)f(?) ? .(4.13)and
We say that ? is attached to , or more speci?cally that ? is attached to ?(?p)?
?(?p + 1).
Observe also that ? approximates Z?? because  is close to Z? and f is close to
f?.
A bubble of generation e + 1 ? 1 for f is an fe-lift of ?. Fix a big M  1.
We assume that the neighborhood U ?Wu in the statement of Key Lemma 4.8 is
selected su?ciently small, depending in particular on M. Since ? is close to Z??,
the map f is close to f?, and ?? (?(0)? ?(1)) is small, we obtain:
Claim 8. Every bubble Z? of f? of generation up to M is approximated by a bubble
? of f such that
(1) ? is close to Z? and f | ? is close to f? | Z?;
(2) if Z? is attached to Z?, then ? is attached to ?; and
(3) if Z? is attached to Z?, then ? is attached to \ (?(0)? ?(1))..
Using Claim 8, we approximate the bubbles Zk in Bx (see (4.11)) with k ? M by
the corresponding bubbles k. We can assume that the remaining ZM+j are within
the linearization domain of x. Taking pullbacks within the linearization domain of
x, we construct the bubble chain Bx(f) landing at x as a sequence ? = 1, 2, .. .
Similarly, By(f) is constructed. The chains Bx?By(f ) are close to Bx?By(f?) in
the following sense: there are continuous maps
g1 : Bx? By(f) ? Bx ? By(f?)g2: Bx ? By(f?)? Bx ? By(f)and
close to the identities. Equation (4.12) holds in the dynamical planes of f. Thus we
have constructed (Rx ? Bx ? By ? Ry) (f ) that is close to (Rx ? Bx ? By ? Ry)(f?).
Assume that D is so small that it is disjoint from the forward orbit of Rx? Ry.
As a consequence, we obtain:
Claim 9. All Dk are disjoint from Rx? Ry.
Proof. We proceed by induction on k ? {t, t?1,. .. , 0}. Since Dk+1 is disjoint from
the forward orbit of Rx ? Ry, so is D?k ? int(Sk); the latter surrounds Dk.
Claim 10. For all k ?{0, 1,. . ., t} the following holds
(1) Dk intersects ? if and only if Ik ? {?p,?p + 1};
(2) If Dk intersects ?, then
is contained in a small neighborhood of c0;
(3) If Dk intersects ? for k < t?1, then k < t?1?p and Dk+1, Dk+2, .. . ,Dk+p+1
are disjoint from ?;
(4) If Dk intersects Bx?By, then the intersection is within ? and, in particular,
Ik ? {?p,?p + 1};
(5) Dk is an open disk disjoint from ?frbUf; in particular, f : D?k ? Dk+1 is a
branched covering (of degree one or two) for k < t.
Proof. We proceed by induction. Suppose that all of the statements are proven for
moments {t, .. . , k + 2, k + 1}; let us prove them for k.
Figure 20. Illustration to the proof of Claim 10, Part (4) in case
px = 3. Suppose that f3 maps the bubble 2 (in Bx) to ? and
suppose that Dk?2 6=?. Let ?2 be the lift of f(2) attached to .
Since f(2) is attached to Sk+1 = Dk+1?  and since Dk+1?Sk+1
does not surround the critical value, we obtain that the pullback
of f(2) along f : D?k? Dk+1is attached to Sk contradicting
Dk ? 2 6= ?.
If Ik ? {?p,?p + 1}, then Dk+1 ? Sk+1(0)? Sk+1(1) 3 c1 (see §4.3.4). Since
Dk+1 contains either Sk+1(?1) or Sk+1(2), we see that D?k = f?1(Dk+1) intersects
Suppose Ik?{?p,?p+1} = ?. Then Dk+1 does not contain c1. Hence every point
in Dk+1 has at most one preimage under f | D?k. Since Dk+1? is connected, everypreimage of Dk+1 ?  under f | D?k is in . By (4.13), D?k has empty intersection
with ?. Since D?k ? Sk does not surround ?, we also obtain Dk ? ? = ?. This
proves Part (1).
Part (2) follows from Dk+1?  ? Sk+1 (see Claim 7), the de?nition of Dk, and
the fact that Sk+1 is a small neighborhood of c1, see Claim 5.
Part (3) follows from Part (1) combined with Claim 4 (Part (2)).
Let us now prove Part (4), see Figure 20 for illustration. By continuity, Part (4)
holds for k ? {t, .. ., t? p}. Below we assume that k < t? p. Assume that Part (4)
does not hold; let Dk ? (Bx \ ??) 6= ?; the case Dk ? (By \ ??) 6=? is similar. Write
Bx = (? = 1,2,3,. .. ),
where i is a bubble attached to i?1. Then there is a i with i? 2 such that
Dk ? i 6= ?.
We assume that i ? 2 is minimal and we claim that i = 2. Recall from §4.3.5 that
fpxmaps ?k+1 to ?k, where px ? p is the minimal period of x. Suppose i > 2 and
from Claim 9), we obtain that D?k ? B(xi) 6= ?; hence Dk+1 ? f(Bx(i)) 6=?. Applying
? Bx(i?1) = Dk+px ? fpx(Bx(i)) 6= ? contradicting theinduction we obtain Dk+px
induction assumption that Part (4) holds for k + px.
Consider the bubbles
f(2), f2(2), .. ., fpx(2) = ?.
BinyteCrslea?cimts 8?P. aIrntd(e3e)dt,hseiyncaereDa?ktt?acShkedistodisjo\in(?t (f0ro)m? ?R(x1,))t.heObdsisekrveD?kthaintteDrske+cptxs
Bx? =j; hence Dk+1?f(B?x)6= ?. Applying induction we obtain Dk+px ?Bx =
j?2
Dk+px ? f px(Bx? ) 6= ?. Therefore, Dk+px ? ? 6= ? because Dk+pxis disjoint from
Bx? by the induction assumption that Part (4) holds for k + px.
intersects ? we have Ik+px? {?p,?p + 1}.Since Dk+pxTherefore, each
fj(2) with j ? {1, . .. ,px} is attached to Sk+j ? Dk+j. Moreover, every point
in Dk+j has at most one preimage under f | D?k+j?1 for j ? {1, . . ., px} because
Dk+j ?  ? Sk+j does not contain c1.
Let ?2 be the lift of f(2) attached to Sk. We note that ?2 6= 2 and f(2) 6= ?
(by (4.12)).Recall that every point in Dk+1 has at most one preimage under
f | D?k. We claim that the lift of f(Dk ? 2) under f | D?k is in ?2 and not in 2.
Indeed, since Dk+1 ? f(2) neither contains nor surrounds the critical value, the
lift of f(Dk? 2) under f | D?k agrees with the lift of f(Dk? 2) under f | ?2. This
proves Part (4).
By Part (2) Dk+1 is disjoint from ?frbUfbecause Dk+1 can intersect Bx ? By
Therefore, f : D?k? Dk+1 is a branchedonly in a small neighborhood of c0.
covering.
This shows ft : D0 ? Dt is a branched covering. Observe next that D0? ? S0
is a small neighborhood of c1 that is disjoint from ?1. We can easily separate D0\
from ?1\  using  and ?nitely many backward iterated lifts of Bx?By? Rx?Ry.
This ?nishes the proof of the Key Lemma.
5. Maximal prepacmen
Let g : X ? Y be a holomorphic map between Riemann surfaces. Recall that g
• proper, if g?1(K) is compact for each compact K ? Y ;
• ?-proper (see [McM2,§8]) if each component of g?1(K) is compact for each
compact K ? Y ; or equivalently if X and Y can be expressed as increasing
unions of subsurfaces Xi, Yi such that g : Xi ? Yi is proper.
A proper map is clearly ?-proper.
A prepacman F = (f? ,f+) of a pacman f is called maximal if both f? and f+
extend to ?-proper maps f? : X? ? C and f+: X+ ? C. We will usually normalize
F such that 0 = ??F1(critical value), where ?F is a quotient map from F to f ,
see §2.3. Under this assumption F is de?ned uniquely up to rescaling.
Theorem 5.1 (Existence of maximal prepacmen). Every f ? Wu su?ciently close
to f? has a maximal prepacman F that depends analytically on f.
A re?ned statement will be proven as Theorem 5.5. The analytic dependence means
that the restriction of a map to a disk compactly contained in the domain depends
analytically in the associated Banach space. In the proof, we will show that F is
obtained from f by an analytic change of variables. Note that analytic dependence
is su?cient to check for one-parameter families.
5.1. Linearization of ?-coordinates. Consider again [f0 : U0 ? V ] ? Wu close
to f?. By de?nition of Wu, the map f0 can be anti-renormalized in?nitely many
times. We de?ne the tower of anti-renormalizations as
T (f0) = (Fk)k?0 .
Each fk embeds to the dynamical pane of fk?1 as a prepacman Fk(k?1) such that
(k?1)
fk,±are iterates of fk?1.
Let us specify the following translation
Tk: z ? z? c1(fk).
Let us now translate each fk so that c1(fk) = 0. We mark the translated objects
with “•.” For k ? 0, set
?•k(z) := Tk?1 ? ?k ? Tk?1
so that ?•k(0) = 0. Similarly, de?ne Uk• := Tk(Uk) and Vk• := Tk(V ); and conjugate
(k)by Tk; the resulting maps are denoted by fk• : Uk• ? Vk•
all fk and all Fk = Fk
and by
Fk• = (fk•,± : Uk•,± ? S•k).
We also write ?1•(fk) := Tk(?1). The tower (Fk•)k?0 is illustrated on Figure 21.
Denote by
µ? := ???(c1(f?)) = (?•?)? (0),|µ?| < 1
the self-similarity coe?cient of Z?.
Lemma 5.2 (Linearization). For every f0 ? Wu su?ciently close to f?, the limit
?•i+1 ?···? ?•0(z)
is a univalent map on a certain neighborhood of 0 (independent on f0).
We remark that the linearization is normalized in such a way that (h•0)?(0) = 1 if
f0 = f?.
Psirnocoef.?•iFotlelonwdss ferxopmonaesnttaianldlyarfdaslitnteoar?iz•?atwioenseaergtuhmatenµti. tWenrditsee?x•ip(zon)e=ntµiaizlly+Ofa(szt2t)o;
µne?igahnbdotrhhaotodthoef c0o,nwsteahn??ta?v•ii+ne1t?he··e·r?ro?r•0(tezr)m?? ?dCoe(s|µn?o|t+d?e)pie|zn|d on i. For z in a small
for some constants C and ? > 0 such that |µ?| + 2? < 1. Write
tends exponentially fast to 1 in some neighborhood of 0. This implies that h(i)(z)
converges to a univalent map in some neighborhood of 0.
Let us write h•i = hfiand we set Si := h•i (Si). We will usually use bold symbols
By construction (5.1), the maps h•i satisfy thefor object in linear coordinates.
linearization equation (see Figure 21)
h•i?1 ? ?•i = [z ? µ?z]? h•i .(5.2)
I(t5.f4o)llows from (h5•0.(2z))t=haht#?1 (?•0(z)) =··· = h#i (?•i+1 ?···? ?•0(z)) .
We will usually use “#” to mark linearized objects rescaled by µ?? i.
Luneimvamlenat 5m.3ap (hE•0x:teinnsti(oVn0• o\f?h1•)•0)?. UCn. der the above assumptions h•0 extends to a
Proof. By Lemma 4.1 the map ?•i?1 ? ··· ? ?•0 extends to a conformal map de?ned
on int(V0•\ ?1•). Since ?•i?1?···??•0 is contracting, for every z ? int(V0•\ ?1•) there
is an i < 0 such that ?•i?1 ? ··· ? ?•0(z) is within a neighborhood of 0 where h•i is
de?ned (this is easily true if f0• = f?•; applying Theorem 4.6 we obtain this property
forLaeltl fu0•s)n. oTwhecorenfjourgea,t(e5.e4v)eeryxtmenadpsFdky•nbaymhic#ka;llwyehd•0et?onienFt(#kV0•:=\h?1#k•).? Fk•?(h#k)?1.
We construct the tower in li(near)coordin(ates)
F#kfk#,± : U#k,± ? S#kT #(F0) =(5.5)=,k?0k?0
5.2. Global extension of prepacmen in Wu. Using Key Lemma 4.8 we deduce
Theorem 5.5 (Existence of a ma(xima)l prepacman). If f0 ? Wu is su?ciently
close to f?, then every pair F#i =fk#,±in the tower T #(F0) (see (5.5)) extends
to ?-proper branched coverings
where X#k,± are open connected subsets of C.
Note that the case f0 = f? follows from [McM2, Theorem 8.1].
F0 = (f0,±: U0,± ? S := V \ (?1 ? O))
be a commuting pair obtained from F0 = (f0,± : U0,± ? V \ ?1) by removing a
small neighborhood O of ? from V \ ?1 and by removing f0?,±1 (O) from U0,±. By
Lemma 4.1 the map ?k?1 ?··· ? ?0 embeds F0 to the dynamical plane of fk as
commuting pair denoted by()
F(0k) =fkak,fkbk: U(0k,?) ? U(0k,+) ? S(0k).(5.8)
Since ?k is contracting at the critical value the diameter of U0(k,?) ? U0(,k+) ? S(0k) 3
c1(fn) tends to 0. By Key Lemma 4.8, for a su?ciently big k < 0 there is a small
open topological disk D around the critical value of fk such that the pair (5.8)
extends into a pair of commu(ting bran)ched coverings
F0(k) =fkak , fkbk: W?(k) ? W+(k) ? D,(5.9)
with W?(k) ? W+(k)? D ? V \ ?1.
Conjugating (5.9) by h#k ? Tk we obtain the commuting pair
Since for a su?ciently big t and all m ? 0 the?modulus of the annulus D(tm?t) \
D(tm) is uniformly bounded from 0 we obtainD(k) = C. Setting
we obtain ?-proper maps f0,± : X0,± ? C, where X0,± are connected. Similarly,
(fk#,±) extends to a pair of ?-proper maps.
6. Maximal parabolic prepacmen
Since the multiplier of the ?-?xed point is in the unstable direction of R at f?
(by Lemma 3.18), we can consider a parabolic pacman f0 ? Wu close to f? such
that Theorem 5.5 applies for f0. As in §5 we denote by Fn = (fn,±) the maximal
prepacmen of fn = Rnf0 with n ? 0 and by F#n the rescaled version of Fn so that
F0 is an iteration of F#n , see Lemma 5.4.
Figure 22. A parabolic pacman f0 with rotation number 1/3 em-
beds as a prepacman into the dynamical plane of a parabolic pac-
We have f0,? = f?31 andman f?1 with rotation number 3/8.
6.1. The post-critical set of a maximal prepacman. The forward orbit of
z ? C under Fn is
orbz(Fn) := {fns,?? fnr,+(z)| s, r ? 0};
wise do not requiroerbth?z aqt(Ffnns,)?:=? f{nrf,+ns,(?z)?ifsnr,d+e(?zn)e|dsf,orr?al{l0p,a1i,r.s.s. ,, rq.}}A. ?nite orbit of z
Similarly, orbz(F#n ) and orb?z q(F#n ) are de?ned. Since F0 is an iteration of F#n ,
orb?z q(F0) ? orb?z k?nq(F#n)there is a k > 1 such that
for all n ? 0 and z ? C.
An orbit path of Fm is a sequence x0, x1,. .. , xn such that either xi+1 = fm,?(xi)
or xi+1 = fm,+(xi). Since F0 is an iteration of F#n , an orbit path of F0 is a “sub-
orbit” path of F#n .
Let us denote by
C(Fk) := {z ? C| fk?,?(z) = 0 or fk?,+(z) = 0}
the set of critical points of Fk; its p?ost-critical set is
fkn,? ? fkm,+(C(Fk)).P (Fk) =
Similarly P (F#n ) is de?ned. Clearly, (F#n) = µn? P(Fn).P(F0)? P
Recall that 0 is a critical value of F#n for all n ? 0; we denote by o#n the
critical point of F#n such that o#n is identi?ed with the critical point c0(fn) under
intS#n ' V \ ?1, see (5.6).
Lemma 6.1 (Every critical orbit “passes” through 0). For any critical point x0 of
f0,? with ? ? {? ,+} the following holds. For all su?ciently big n < 0 there is an
orbit path of F#n
Pfrroomof.thCeleparrolyo,f tohfe?Tsheecoonredmst5a.t5e.mSeuntppfoolsleowfosrfrdoem?ntihteen?erssst.? =We“?wi??l.l uRseecnaollta(t5i.o1n0s)
W?(n); thus x0 ? W(?n) for some n < 0. The map f0,? | W(?n)that Dom f0,? =
| W?(n) ? D (see (5.9)) after identifying W(?n) withis conformally conjugate to fnan
(n)
W? . This shows that x0, f0,?(x0) us within an actual orbit x0, x1, . . . ,xk of
which is a prepacman of fn. We deduce that one of xi is o#n and xi+1 = 0.

6.2. Global attracting basin of a parabolic pacman. Since f0,± : Dom f0,± ?
C are ?-proper commuting maps with maximal domain we have
Dom(f0,? ? f0,+) = Dom(f0,+ ? f0,?)? DomF0 := Dom f0,? ? Dom f0,+.(6.2)
Note that for every q ? 1 we have f0q 6= id in any small neighborhood of ?(f0)
because, otherwise, considering a lift f0r,??f0s,+ of f0q we would obtain f0r,??f0s,+ = id
in C which is impossible. Therefore, there is a small open attracting parabolic ?ower
H0 around the ?-?xed point of f0. Each petal of H0 lands at ? at a well-de?ned
angle. Assume H0 is small enough so that H0 ? V \ ?1, possibly up to a slight
rotation of ?1. By Lemma 4.3 the ?ower H0 lifts to the dynamical plane of F0 via
the identi?cation V \ ?1 ' int S0; we denote by H0 the lift.
Let e(p0/q0) 6= 1 be the multiplier of the ?-?xed point of f0. Since f0 is close to
f?, we have q0 > 1. By replacing H0 with its sub-?ower we can assume that there
are exactly q0 connected components of H0 with combinatorial rotation number
p0/q0. We enumerate them counterclockwise as H00, H01, . . . ,H0q0?1. Then f0 maps
H0i to H0i+p0. We will show in Corollary 6.4 that H0 is in fact unique; i.e. f0 has
exactly q0 attracting directions at ?. Denote by Hi0 the lift of H0i to the dynamical
plane of F0.
The set H0 is in Dom(f0a,? ? f0b,+) for all a, b ? 0.
It will follow from Proposition 6.5 that f0r,??f0s,+ : Hi0 ? Hi0 is the ?rst return map.
Proof. We have f0q0(H0i) ? Hi0. Cutting the prepacman f0 along ?1 we see that
there are r,s? 1 with r + s = q0 such that f0r,? ? f0s,+(H0i)? H0i. This implies the
?rst claim. As a consequence, H0 is in Dom(f0r,j? ? f0s,j+) for all j ? 0. Combined
with (6.2), we obtain the second claim.
As a consequence, all of the br?anches of f0a,? ? f0b,+ with a, b ? Z are well de?nedfor points in H0. Set
(f0,?)a ? (f0,+)b (H0)H :=
to be the full orbit of H0.Since f0,?, f0,+ commute and H0 is forward invari-
ant under f0r,? ? f0s,+, the set H is an open fully invariant subset of C within
Domf0,? ? Domf0,+. We call H the global attracting basin of the ?-?xed point.
A connected component H? of H is periodic if there are s,r ? N>0 such that
f0s,? ? f0r,+(H?) = H?.A pair (s, r) is called a period of H?.We will show in
Corollary 6.6 that there is no component H? of H such that f0r,?(H?) = H? or
f0r,+(H?) = H? for some r > 0.
By Lemma 6.2, the components of H intersecting H0 are (r, s)-periodic. Observe
next that for any periodic component H? and any component H?? of H there are
a,b? 1 with f0a,?? f0b,+(H??) = H?; i.e. H? and H?? are dynamically related. Indeed,
by de?nition there are a?, b? ? Z such that a certain branch of f0a,?? ? f0b,?+ maps
H?? to H?. Applying f0s,t? ? f0r,t+ with t  1, we obtain required a,b ? 1.As a
consequence, all the periodic components have the same periods; in particular they
are (r,s)-periodic.
6.3. Attracting Fatou coordinates. It is classical that f0qi : H00 ? H00 admits
attracting Fatou coordinates: a univalent map h : H00 ? C such that
• h? f0q0(z) = h(z) + 1; and
• there is an L > 1 such that
h(H00) ?{z ? C | Re(z) > L}.(6.3)
There is a unique dynamical extension h: H0 ? C such that
h? f0(z) = h(z) + 1/q0.(6.4)
Lifting h to the dynamical plane of F0 we obtain h: H0 ? C.
Lemma 6.3 (Fatou coordinates of H). The map h: H0 ? C extends uniquely to
a map h: H ? C satisfying
h ? f0,±(z) = h(z) + 1/q0.(6.5)
for any choice of “±”. For every component H? of H, the map h | H? is ?-proper.
The singular values of h are exactly the h-images of the critical points of F0 and
their iterated preimages.
Moreover, components of H0 are in di?erent components of H. The set H is a
proper subset of C. By postcomposing h with a translation we can assume that
(6.6)h(0) = 0.
Proof. On H0 Equation (6.5) is just a lift of(6.4). Applying f0?,±1 and using com-
mutativity of f0,?,f0,+, we obtain a unique extension of h to H such that (6.5)
holds.
Since f0,?, f0,+ are ?-proper maps, so is h | H. Indeed, suppose that H? ? H is
a periodic component intersecting H0; the other cases follow by applying a certain
Recall from Lemma 6.2 that H? is (r, s)-branch of f0a,? ? f0b,+, where a,b ? Z.
periodic. Consider a compact set K ? C. We denote by K a connected component
of the preimage of K under h | H?. Then for a su?ciently big i  1, we have
Re(K + i) > L and K2 := f0r,i? ? f0s,i+(K) intersects H0, where L is a constant
from (6.3). Then K2 ? H0 and K2 is compact as a connected component of the
preimage of K + i under h | H? ? H0. We obtain that K ? f0?,?ri ? f0?,+si(K2) is
compact because f0r,i? ? f0s,i+ is ?-proper. This also shows that singular values of h
are the h-images of either critical points of F0 or their iterated preimages. (We
recall a ?-proper map has no asymptotic values.)
Let Hx0 and Hy0 be two di?erent components of H0 and let Hx and Hy be the
periodic components of H containing Hx0 and Hy0. Since all points in Hx and Hy,
escape eventually to Hx0 and Hy0 under the iteration of f0r,??f0s,+ we have Hx 6= Hy.
As a consequence H 6= C. The claim concerning (6.6) is immediate.
From now on we assume that (6.6) holds. Denote by Hper ? H the union of
periodic components of H.
Corollary 6.4 (Critical point). The set Hper contains P(F0) and at least one
critical point. In particular, 0 ? Hper. All the critical points of F0 are within H.
In the dynamical plane of f0 the ?ower H0 is unique: f0 has exactly q0 attracting
direction at ? cyclically permuted by f0.
Proof. Since h: Hper ? C is not a covering map, Hper contains at least one critical
point of F0. Since Hper is forward invariant, Hper contains o#n for all su?ciently
big n < 0, see Lemma 6.1. Therefore, Hper contains all of the critical values of F0.
Since H is fully invariant, it contains all of the critical points. As a consequence, H0
is unique because the global attracting basin of another ?ower would also contain
0.
6.4. Dynamics of periodic co?mponents. It follows from Lemma 6.2 that
(fn#,?)a ? (fn#,+)b (H0)H =
a,b?Z
for all n ? 0. It is also clear that Hper is the union of F#n -periodic components.
Let Hn be a small parabolic attracting ?ower of fn admitting a lift to the dy-
namical plane of F#n ; we denote this lift by H#n ? Hn. We denote by pn/qn the
combinatorial rotation number of fn.
Let In be an index set enumerating clockwise the connected components of Hn
starting with the component closest to ?1.Since Hn embeds naturally to the
dynamical plane of fn?1 (see Figure 22), we have a natural embedding of In to
In?1.
Let us write
I0 ={?a0,?a0 + 1,. .. b0 ? 1, b0}
with a0, b0 > 0 and a0 + b0 + 1 = q0. The component of H0 indexed by i + 1
follows in the clockwise order the component of H0 indexed by i. Then f0 maps
the component of H0 indexed by i to the component of H0 indexed by either i? p0
or i + q0 ? p0 depending on whether i? p0 ? ?a0.
Figure 23. The maximal prepacman F0 = (f0,±) of a parabolic
pacman f0 with rotation number 1/3, see Figure 22. The map f0,?
shifts periodic components of H to the left while f0,+ shifts the
periodic components of H to the right. We have fn,? = fn2?1,? ?
fn?1,+ and fn,+ = fn?1,??fn?1,+ for all n (obtained from f0,? = f13
and f0,+ = f12 in Figure 22).
s?o Fthoratevthereynnat<ura0l, echmoboesdedainpgaoraf mInetteorizIant?i1onisIvnie=we{d?aans ,I?na?n +In1?,1... .Sbent?I?1?, bn:=}
In = Z.
Recall (see §6.2) that a connected component H? of H is periodic if f0s,? ?
f0r,+(H?) = H? for some s,r ? N>0.
Proposition 6.5 (Parameterization of Hper). The connected components of Hper
are uniquely enumerated as (Hi)i?Z so that for every su?ciently big n  0 the
component Hi contains the image of the component of Hn indexed by i under Hn '
fn#,?(Hi) = (Hi?pn) and fn#,+(Hi) = Hi+qn?pn.(6.7)
Moreover, by re-enumerating components of H0 we can assume that H0 contains
Proof. By co?nstruction, I?? ' Z enumerates all of the?periodic components of H
H#n with actions given by (6.7). SinceHi is forward invariantintersecting
and sinc?e evne?ry0 periodic component is in the forward io?rZbit of H0 (see §6.2), we
Hi= Hper.We can re-enumerate (Hi)i?Z in a unique way so thatobtain

Corollary 6.6. There is no component H? of H such that f0r,?(H?) = H? or
f0r,+(H?) = H? for some r > 0.
Proof. Suppose converse and consider such H?, say f0r,?(H?) = H?. Choose a,b? Z
such that a certain branch of f0a,??f0b,+ maps H? to H0. Recall that (r, s) is a period
of H0. By postcomposing f0a,? ? f0b,+ with an iterate of f0r,? ? f0s,+ we can assume
that a, b ? 0. It now follows from Proposition 6.5 that applying ?rst f0r,? | H? and
then f0a,? ? f0b,+ is di?erent from applying f0a,? ? f0b,+ | H? and then f0r,?. This is a
contradiction.
Proof. It is su?cient to prove it for n = 0. Suppose f0a,??f0b,+(0) = f0c,?? f0d,+(0). It
follows from (6.5) that a+b = c+d. If (a, b) is not equal to (c, d), then f0a,??f0b,+(0),
f0c,? ? f0d,+(0) are in di?erent connected components of Hper, see (6.7). Therefore,
a = c and b = d.
6.5. Valuable ?owers of parabolic pacmen. This subsection is a preparation
for proving the Scaling Theorem (§8); it will not be used in proving the Hyperbol-
icity Theorem (§7).
De?nition 6.8 (Valuable ?owers). Let f be a parabolic pacman with rotation
number p/q. A valuable ?ower (see Figure 26) is an open forward invariant set H
such that
(A) H? {?(f)} is connected;
(B) H has q connected components H0,H1 . .. ,Hq?1, called petals, enumerated
counterclockwise at ?; every Hi is an open topological disk with a single
access to ?;
(C) f(Hi)? Hi+p;
(D) all of the points in H are attracted by ?;
(E) H?p contains the critical point of f .
We remark that a local ?ower (see §6.2) satis?es (A)–(D).
We say a Siegel triangulation (see §4.1.5)  respects a ?ower H if every petal of
H is within a triangle of .
Theorem 6.9 (Parabolic valuable ?owers). Let f0 ? Wu be a parabolic pacman.
Then for all su?ciently big n  0 the pacman fn = Rnf0 has a valuable ?ower Hn
and a Siegel triangulation (fn) respecting Hn such that
• (fn) has a wall (fn) approximating ?Z?;
conMstor•ruecotve(edfrn,i?n1fo)sruacnahdgaiHvewnn?a1ycaltohrseaetdfuDldlislpikfrtosDjeocf?ts(Hvfian0)itnahten(d?SHo#nwn).e'r HVn\w?i1th(snee(50.6)c)antobae
subset of H0n.
Proof. Let us recall (see §6.2) that a local ?ower H0 was chosen su?ciently small
such that H0 ? V \ ?1, possibly up to a slight rotation of ?1 in a small neighbor-
hood of ?. We denote by n0ew the triangulation obtained from 0 by this slight
adjustment of ?1. By Lemma 4.3, the triangulation n0ew admits a full lift n?enw to
the dynamical plane of fn for all n ? 0. Since H0 is respected by n0ew, the ?ower
6.5.1. Valuable petals. Recall that pn/qn denotes the rotation number of fn.A
valuable petal Hjn of fn is an open connected set attached to ? such that
• fnqnextends analytically from a neighborhood of ? to fnqn : Hjn ? Hjn; (in
particular, Hjn is fnqn-invariant)
• fnqn : Hjn ? Hjn has a critical point; and
• all points in Hjn are attracted to ? under fnqn.
Claim 1. There is an n  0 such that fn has a valuable petal H0n containing the
critical value 0 such that H0n = Hn0?D, where Hn0 is a petal of Hn and D is a small
neighborhood of c1 containing the projection of D via (5.6). Moreover, there is an
M > 0 such that fnqnM(H0n) ? Hn.
Proof. In the dynamical plane of F0 consider the petal H0 3 0. Recall from §6.4
that H#n denotes the lift of Hn to the dynamical plane of F#n . If n 0 is su?ciently
big, then H0 contains a unique connected component of H#n , call it (H#n )0. Note
also that (H#n )0 = (H#m)0 for all su?ciently big n, m 0, see Proposition 6.5.
Enlarge D to a bigger closed disk D ? H0 such that
• (LHem#nm)0a?6D.(2;isanfdorward)invariant under the ?rst return map f0r,? ? f0s,+, see
• f0r,? ? f0s,+(H#n )0? D 3 0.
Since D is compact, we have D ? S#n for all su?ciently big n  0. For such
n we can project D to the dynamical plane of fn; we denote this projection by
D 3 c1. By construction, D ? Hn0 is fnqn-invariant: fnqn : Hn0 ? Hn0 has an analytic
extension to fnqn : D?Hn0 ? D?Hn0. For n  0, the disk D is a small neighborhood
of c1.
For n  0, we enumerate petals of Hn counterclockwise so that H0n ? H0n.
Choose a big K (we will specify K in §6.5.3). For k ? {0, 1,. .. , K} we de?ne Dk to
be the image of D0 = D under fnqnk, and for k ? {?K,?K + 1,. .. ,?1} we de?ne
Dk to be the lift of D0 along the orbit of fn?qnk : Hnqnk ? H0n. Then
Hqnnk := Hqnnk? Dk;(6.8)
is a valuable petal extending Hnqnk for all k ? {?K, . .. ,K}. For n  0, all Hqnnk
are in a small neighborhood of Z?.
6.5.2. Walls respecting Hn. Set N := M + 3, where M is de?ned in Claim 1. Let
us consider the dynamical plane of f0. In a small neighborhood of ? we can choose
a univalent (N + 1)q0-wall A0 respecting H0 in the following way:
(a) ? is in the bounded component O0 of C\ A0 while the critical point and
the critical value of f0 are in the unbounded component of C\ A0;
(b) each petal H0i intersects A0 at a connected set;
and by enlarging H0, we can also guarantee:
(c) H0 contains all z ? A0 ? O0 with forward orbits in A0? O0.
We can also assume that the intersection of A0 with each triangle of n0ew is a
closed topological rectangle. Lifting these rectangles to the dynamical plane of fn
and spreading around them, we obtain a full lift An of A0. Then An is a univalent
Nqn-wall (see Lemma B.12) enclosing an open topological disk On 3 ? such that
An respects Hn as above (see (a)–(c)). Naturally, An consists of closed topological
rectangles: each rectangle is in a certain triangle of nnew.
Claim 2. For n  0, the wall An approximates ?Z? (compare to Lemma 4.2,
Part (5)): ?Z? is a concatenation of arcs J0J1 . . .Jm?1 such that Ji is close to the
i-th rectangle of An counting counterclockwise.
Proof. By Theorem 4.6, it is su?cient to prove such statement in the dynamical
plane of f?: if A0 is an annulus bounded by two equipotentials of Z?, then a full
lift An approximates ?Z? for a big n.Since the anti-renormalization change of
variables for f? is conjugate to z ? zt with t < 1, the claim follows.
ForCkon?siZde,rwteheded?ynneamical plancek :o=f f(f?.? |RZec?a)lkl(tch0a).t f? | Z? is a homeomorphism.
Consider now the dynamical plane of fn. For k ? {?K,?K + 1, . .. ,K}, we de?ne
ck(fn) ? fnk{c0} to be the closest point to ck(f?). The point ck(fn) is well de?ned
as long as fn is in a small neighborhood of f?.
Claim 3. For k ?{?K,?K + 1, . . . ,K}, we have
• ck?1(fn) ? Hqnnk; and
• Hqnnk \ On is in a small neighborhood of ck?1
? Hqnnk, see (6.8).Proof. The ?rst statement follows from ck?1(fn) ? DkThe
second statement follows from the improvement of the domain.
Claim 4. Let P be a connected component of On\ Hn. Then fnqni | P is univalent
for all i ?{1, .. . , N}. Moreover,
fnqni(P )? fnqnj(P )for all i < j in {0, 1, . .. ,N}.
Proof. The ?rst claim follows from the assertion that An is an Nqn-wall.The
second claim follows from (c).
6.5.3. Julia rays in ?J?. Consider the dynamical plane of f? : U? ? V . By Theo-
rem 3.12, we can choose (see Figure 24) two periodic points x, y ? J? together with
two periodic external rays Rx, Ry landing at x, y and two periodic bubble chains
Bx, By landing at x, y so that x and y are close to ?frbU? and Rx ? Bx? By ? Ry
separates ?frbU? from c1 as well as from all the remaining points in the forward
orbits of x,y. Let p be a common period of x,y. Set K := 4p.
A Julia ray J of J? is a simple arc in J? starting at a point in ?Z?.
Claim 5. There are Julia rays Jx ? Bx and Jy ? By such that Jx and Jy start
at the critical point c0 and land at x and y respectively. Moreover, Jx and Jy are
periodic with period p: the rays Jx and Jy decompose as concatenations Jx1Jx2Jx3 .. .
and Jy1Jy2Jy3 . .. such that f?p maps Jxk and Jyk to Jxk?1 and Jyk?1 respectively.
Proof. Write Bx = (Z1, Z2, .. . ); since x is close to ?frbU? we see that Z1 = Z??.
Since x is periodic with period p, there is an a > 0 such that fp maps Za+i to Zi
for all i.
Let Jx1 ? J? be a simple arc in ?Z1??Z2?···??Za connecting the critical point
c0 to the point where ?Za+1 is attached to ?Za. We inductively de?ne Jxj to be
Figure 24. Separation of ?frbU?. Co-Siegel disk Z?? together with
its iterated lifts form two periodic bubble chains landing at periodic
points x and y. The bubble chains together with external rays Rx
and Ry separate ?frbU? from ?.
the iterated lift of Jxj?1 such that Jxj starts where Jxj?1 terminates. This constructs
Jx = Jx1Jx2Jx3 .. .; similarly Jy = Jy1Jy2Jy3 . . . is constructed.
6.5.4. Julia rays for fn. Recall that in Claim 5 we speci?ed Julia rays Jx(f?) and
Jy(f?).Since f0 is su?ciently close to f?, the periodic points x, y exist in the
dynamical plane of f0 and are close to those of f?. For n 0 let us now construct
Julia rays Jx(fn) = Jx1Jx2Jx3 . . . and Jy(fn) = Jy1Jy2Jy3 .. . such that
(1) fnp maps Jxk to Jxk?1 and Jyk to Jyk?1 (compare with Claim 5);
(2) Jxk(fn) and Jyk(fn) are in small neighborhoods of Jxk(f?) and Jyk(f?) respec-
(3) tfoivrelzy;? Jx1?? Jx2 ? Jy1 ? Jy2 there is a q ? 2p such that either fnq(z) ? On or
fnq(z) ?Hknqn. In the former case we can assume that fn`(z) ? An?On
Construction of Jx and Jy. We will use notations from the proof of Claim 5. By
stability of periodic points, x, y exist for fn and are close to x(f?), y(f?). The curve
Jx1 is a simple arc in ?Z1 ? ?Z2 ? ···? ?Za.We split J1 as the concatenation
`1? `2···? `a with `j = Jx1? ?Zj. Let f?d(j) be the smallest iterate mapping Zj to
˜?j := f?d(j)(`j)Z?. Since Jx ? J?, the curve
iHstna(Uj)ss+iimn1g?plCeHl0naari.mcLsiinf2t?inaZng?d˜?jc3o(,fnwnne)ecaatploinpngrgocxt1ihmeaanbtdreaaenaccchehrot˜?fjif(nfnd?(c)jt)(jbt)y.haatciusrcvleo˜?sej(tfon)f?wd(ijt)h|in`jO(fn??),
we construct `j(fn) that is close to `j(f?). Assembling all `j, we construct Jx1(fn).
By continuity, pulling back J1x(fn) we construct ?nitely many Jxk(fn) approximating
Jxk(f?) such that the remaining curves Jxk(f?) are within the linearization domain of
Figure 25. Illustraction to the proof of Claim 6. If Y intersects
O?n, then applying fn we obtain that P ? fn(Y ) encloses H0n. Since
P is surrounded by the wall An, the set fnqnM (P ? fn(Y )) also
encloses H0n. Then fnqn| fnqnM (P ? fn(Y )) has degree one while
| H0n has degree 2; this is a contradiction.fnqn
x. Taking pullbacks within the linearization domain of x, we construct a ray Jx(fn)
landing at x. Similarly, Jy is constructed. Property (3) follows from |t(j)|? p.
6.5.5. Blocking ?frbUn. Recall from Claim (1) that fnqnM(H0n) ? Hn0.For t ?
{M,M ? 1, M ? 2, .. ., 0} we set Hn(t) to be the forward fn-orbit of fnqnk(H0n).
Claim 6. The ?ower Hn(t) does not intersect ?frbUn for all t? {M,. . . , 0}.
As a consequence, Hn extends to a required Hn := Hn(0) for n  0.
PS(6er.ot9o)f. Recall that valuable pHetn?a(tl)s:H=knpHnn(t?) \Un?withH|knkp|n?. K are already constructed.
Let us show that Hn?(t) does not hit Rx? Jx ? Jy ? Ry; this would imply that Hn(t)
does not intersect ?frbUn. Suppose converse; since Hn?(t) does not intersect Rx?Ry,
we can consider the ?rst moment t (i.e. t is the closest to M) when Hn?(t) hits Jx?Jy.
Denote by X a petal of Hn?(t) intersecting Jx ? Jy. Choose z ? X ? (Jx? Jy); we
cHann?(t)ashsiutsmJexth?aJtyz. ?ByJxP1 r?o?pJxe2r?tyJ(y13)?fJroy2m, o§t6h.e5r.w4,istehetriesinsoat qth?e ?2rpstsumchomtheanttewithheenr
fnq?(z) ? On or fnq(z) ?Hknqn. The latter would imply that X is a petal in|k|?2p
Hknqn; this contradicts to (6.9). Therefore, fnq(z)? On.
O?n := fn?1(On)\ (An? On) 3 fnq?1(z)
and set Y := fq?1(X). We have O?n ? Y 3 fnq?1(z), see Figure 25. Since H?n pn
contains a critical point, we see that fnq(z) is within a connected components P of
On \ (Hn ?{?}) and, moreover, P ? fn(Y ) surrounds H0n.
Let us apply fnqnM to fn(Y ) ? P.By Claim 4 (recall that N > M + 1, see
§6.5.2), we have fnqnM(P) ? (An ? On) \ Hn and fnqnM(P ) does not contain a
critical point of fnqn. On the other hand, fnqnM+1(Y ) does not contain a critical
point of fnqnas a subset of Hn. Note that fnqnM (P ? fn(Y )) still surrounds H0n.
This is a contradiction: fnqn| fnqnM (P ? fn(Y )) has degree one while fnqn| H0n has
degree 2.
6.5.6. Siegel triangulation. It remains to construct a Siegel triangulation (fn) re-
specting Hn for n  0. In the dynamical plane of fn, let us choose a curve `1 ? V
connecting ?V to ? such that `1 enters Un in O?n, then reaches ?H?npn, then travels
to ? within ?H?npn. We can assume that `1 \ On is disjoint from ?1 \ On. Observe
that `1 is liftable to the dynamical planes fm for all m ? n. Indeed, `1 ? ?H?n pnis
liftable because so is ?H?npn, while `1 \ ?H?npnis liftable because it is disjoint from
?1.
Let us slightly perturb `1 so that the new `1 is disjoint from Hn. De?ne `0 to
the preimage of `1 connecting ?Un to ?. Then `1 ? `0 splits Un into two closed
sectors; they form the triangulation denoted by (fn). We can assume that `1 was
chosen so that `1 \ On and `0 \ On are connected. We de?ne the wall (fn) to be
the closures of two connected components of Un\ (On ? `0? `1).
For m ? n we de?ne (fm) and (fm) to be the full lifts of (fn) and (fn).
Then (fm) is a required triangulation for m  n.
Recall that by ?? we denote the multiplier of the ?-?xed point of f?. For ? close
to ?? set
F(?) := {f ? Wu | the multiplier of ? is ?}
the analytic submanifold of Wu parametrized by ?xing the multiplier at ?. Then
F(?) forms a foliation of a neighborhood of f?.
7.1. Holomorphic motion of P(F0). Let U ? Wu be a small neighborhood of
f? such that every f ? U has a maximal prepacmen, see Theorem 5.5.
Lemma 7.1 (Holomorphic motion?of the critical orbits). For every p/q, the set
orb0(F#n )
moves holomorphically with f0 ? F(e(p/?q)) ?U.
orb0(F#n ) thus P (F0) also moves holo-Recall from Lemma 6.1 that P (F0) ?
morphically with f0 ?F(e(p/q))?U.
Proof. By Corollary 6.7, points in orb0(F#n ) do not collide with each other when
f0 ? F(e(p/q)) ?U is deformed. This gives a holomorphic motion of orb0(F0) ?
orb0(F#1 )? orb0(F#2 ) ? .. . and we can take the union.
Let U? ? U be a neighborhood of f? such that every non-empty F(?)?U? has
radius at least three times less than those of F(?)?U.
Corollary 7.2 (Extended holomorphic motions). For f0 ? F(e(p/q))?U? there is
aofh(oFlo#nm)nor)pohnic motion ?(f0) of C? su?ch that ?(f0) is equivariant (with the dynamics
orb0(F#n ).
Proof. Follows by applying the ?-lemma to the holomorphic motion from Lemma 7.1.

Corollary 7.3 (Passing to the limit of holomorphic motions). For f0 ? F(??)?U?
there is a holomorphic motion ?(f0?) of C? such that ?(f0) is equivariant on
orb0(F#n ).
Proof. Choose a sequence pn/qn such that e(pn/qn) ? e(??). By passing to the
limit in Corollary 7.2 we obtain the required property.
Corollary 7.4. The dimension of F(??) is 0.
Proof. Suppose the dimension of F(??) is gr?eater than 0.Consider the space
F(??)?U?. By Corollary 7.3 the set P(F0) ?orb0(F#n ) moves holomorphically
with f0 ? F(??) ?U?. Projecting this holomorphic motion to the dynamical plane
of f0, we obtain a holomorphic motion of the post-critical set of f0 ? F(??)? U?.
Therefore, there is a small neighborhood of f? in F(??)? U? consisting of Siegel
maps. But all such maps must be in the stable manifold of f? by Theorem 7.5.
7.2. The exponential convergence. The following theorem follows from [McM2,
Theorem 8.1].
Theorem 7.5. Suppose that a pacman f ? B is Siegel of the same rotation number
as f? such that f is su?ciently close to f?. Then Rnf converges exponentially fast
to f?.
Remark 7.6. The proof of [McM2, Theorem 8.1] is based on a “deep point argu-
ment”. Alternatively, the exponential convergence follows from a variation of the
Schwarz lemma following the lines of [L1, AL1].
7.3. The Hyperbolicity Theorem.
Theorem 7.7 (Hyperbolicity of R). The renormalization operator R: B ? B is
hyperbolic at f? with one-dimensional unstable manifold Wu and codimension-one
stable manifold Ws.
In a small neighborhood of f? the stable manifold Ws coincides with the set of
pacmen in B that have the same multiplier at the ?-?xed point as f?. Every pacman
in Ws is Siegel.
In a small neighborhood of f? the unstable manifold Wu is parametrized by the
multipliers of the ?-?xed points of f ?Wu.
Proof. It was already shown in Corollary 7.4 that the dimension ofWu is one. Let us
show thatWs has codimension one. Denote byB? the submanifold ofB consisting of
all the pacmen with the same multiplier at the ?-?xed point as f?. ThenR naturally
restricts to R: B? ? B?. Consider the derivative Di?(R | B?); by Corollary 7.4
the spectrum of Di?(R | B?) is within the closed unit disk.Suppose that the
spectrum of Di?(B?) intersects the unit circle. By [L1, Small orbits theorem]R| B?
has a small slow orbit: there is an f ? B? such that f is in?nitely many times
renormalizable but
Figure 26. A satellite valuable ?ower (red) of the 5/13 Rabbit
approximates the golden Siegel disk (also red).
Moreover, it can be assumed that {Rnf}n?0 is in a su?ciently small neighborhood
of f?. By Corollary 4.7, f is a Siegel pacman and by Theorem 7.5, Rnf converges
This is a contradiction. Therefore, the spectrum of Rexponentially fast to f?.
is compactly contained in the unit disk, all of the pacmen in B? are in?nitely
renormalizable and thus are Siegel (Corollary 4.7). The submanifold B? coincides
with Ws in a small neighborhood of f?.
7.4. Control of Siegel disks. The following lemma follows from [McM2, Theorem
8.1] combined with Theorem 3.6 and Lemma 3.4.
Lemma 7.8. Every Siegel map f has a pacman renormalization R2f such that
R2f is in B and is su?ciently close to f?.
We say a holomorphic map f : U ? V is locally Siegel if it has a distinguished
Siegel ?xed point. The following corollary follows from Theorem 7.7 combined with
Lemma 7.8
Corollary 7.9. Let f : U ? W be a Siegel map with rotation number ? ? ?per
and let N(f) be a small Banach neighborhood of f. Then every locally Siegel map
g ? N(f) with rotation number ? is a Siegel map. Moreover, the Siegel disk Zg
depends continuously on g.
8. Scaling Theorem
In this section we prove a re?ned version of Theorem 1.3. Consider ?? ? ?per
and let f be a Siegel map with rotation number ??. Let U 3 f be a small Banach
neighborhood of f and let W ? U be a one-dimensional slice containing f such that
W is transverse to the hybrid class of f; i.e. in a small neighborhood of f ? W all
maps have di?erent multipliers at their ?-?xed points.
We say a map g ? U is satellite if it has a satellite valuable ?ower:
De?nition 8.1 (Satellite valuable ?owers). A satellite valuable ?ower of g is an
open forward invariant set H such that (see Figure 26)
(A) H? {?(g)} is connected;
(B) H has q connected components H0,H1 . .. ,Hq?1, called petals, enumerated
counterclockwise at ?; every Hi is an open topological disk with a single
access to ?;
(C) g(Hi)? Hi+p, where p is coprime to q;
(D) there is an attracting periodic cycle ? = (?0, ?1, .. ., ?q?1) with ?i ? Hi
attracting all points in H;
(E) H?p contains the critical point of g.
The number p/q is called the combinatorial rotation number of H. The multiplier
of H is the multiplier of ?.
For convenience, let us say that a parabolic valuable ?ower (see De?nition 6.8)
with rotation number p/q is a satellite valuable ?ower with rotation number p/q
and multiplier 1.
By Lemma 3.18, R acts on the rotation numbers of indi?erent pacmen as Rkprm
for a certain k ? 1; see also Remark 3.19.
• gn,thas a satellite valuable ?ower Hn,t with rotation number pn/qnand
multiplier ?t;
•• aodlnilstHt(;fna,,tngdna,rte) i?n(th(Re kpgrimve)n?(?s?m))anll fnoerigehvbeorryhto.od of Zf and depend continuously
Note that the path gn,t starts at a unique parabolic map in W with rotation number
pn/qn.
8.1. Proof of Theorem 8.2. The proof is split into short subsections. Consider
a pacman hyperbolic renormalization operator R: B 99K B around a ?xed point
f? =R(f?) with rotation number ??. As before, Wu denotes the unstable manifold
of R at f?.
8.1.1. Perturbation of parabolic pacmen. By shifting the sequence (pn/qn)n we can
assume that p0/q0 is close to ??. Then there is a unique parabolic pacman f0 ?Wu
with rotation number p0/q0. Then fn := Rnf0,n ? 0 has rotation number pn/qn.
By Theorem 6.9 and possibly by further shifting (pn/qn)n, we can assume that:
• each fn has a valuable ?ower H(fn) at the ?-?xed;
• each fn has a triangulation (fn) respecting H(fn): every petal of H(fn) is
within a triangle of (fn);
• (fn) has a wall (fn) approximating ?Z?;
• (fn) and H(fn) are the full lifts of (fn+1) and H(fn+1).
Let g0 ? Wu be a slight perturbation of f0 that splits ? into a repelling ?xed point
? and an attracting cycle ?(g0) such that ? is on the boundary of the immediate
attracting basin of ?(g0). Then (f0), (g0), H(f0) are perturbed to (g0), (g0),
H(g0) such that all points in H(g0) are attracted by ?(g0). We can assume that
the perturbation is su?ciently small such that (g0) still approximates ?Z?. By
Lemma 4.4, there are full lifts (gn), H(gn) of (g0), H(g0).
As before, we denote by Fn and Gn the maximal prepacmen of fn and gn and
we denote G#n the the rescaled version of Gn such that G0 = G#0 is an iteration of
G#n . Recall from §6.2 that H(f0) admits a global extension H(F0) in the dynamical
plane of F0. Similarly, we now de?ne the maximal extension H(Gn) of H(gn).
Each H(gn) lifts to the dynamical plane of G#n ; denote by H(g0) the lift of H(g0).
?Similar to (6.2), we set
to be the full orbit of H(g0). The same argument as in the proof of Lemma 6.2
shows that H(G0) is fully invariant and is within Dom G0,? ? Dom G0,+.
Denote by Hper(G0) the union of periodic components of H(G0). The same
argument as in the proof of Proposition 6.5 shows:
Proposition 8.3 (Parameterization of Hper(G0)). The connected components of
Hper(G0) are uniquely enumerated as (Hi)i?Z such that H0 3 0 and such that the
actions of gn#,0± on (Hi)i?Z are given (up to interchanging gn,? and gn,+) by
g#n,?(Hi) = (Hi?pn) and g#n,+(Hi) = Hi+qn?pn.(8.1)
8.1.2. QC-deformation of gn. Suppose ?rst that ?1 6= 0. Denote by ?0 the multi-
plier of ?(g0). Let gr0,??gs0,+: H0(G0) ? H0(G0) be the ?rst return map (compare
with Lemma 6.2). There is a semiconjugacy h: H0(G0) ? C from gr0,? ? gs0,+ to
the linear map z ? ?0z. Choose a continuous path of qc maps ?t: C ? C with
t ? [0, 1] such that ?0 = id and ?t conjugates z ? ?0z to z ? ?tz.
Lifting ?t under h and spreading dynamically the associated Beltrami form, we
obtain a qc map ?t : C ? C conjugating G0 to a maximal prepacman G0,t; similarly
?t conjugates G#n,t to a maximal prepacman G#n,t for n? 0.
De?ne now ?n,t to be the projection of ? t to the dynamical plane of gn via
intS#k ' V \ ?1 (see (5.6)); we normalize ?n,t to preserve ?(gn) and c1(gn). By
compactness of qc-maps, there is a small T > 0 such that all gn,t are in B for t ? T .
For m ? 0 consider the sequence R?n+m(gn,t). All pacmen in this sequence are qc-
conjugate with uniform dilatation. Moreover, the conjugacies preserve the critical
value and the ?-?xed point because of the normalization for renormalization change
of variables, see§2.5. By compactness of qc-maps,R?n+m(gn,t) has an accumulated
point qm,t ? B, and moreover, we can assume that Rqm,t = qm+1,t; i.e. qm,t ?Wu
and qm,t tends to f? as m tends to ??. We de?ne (qn,t), (qn,t),H(qn,t) to be
the images of (gn,t), (gn,t), H(gn,t) via the qc-conjugacy from gn,t to qn,t. By
improvement of the domain, (qn,t) is in a small neighborhood of Z? and (qn,t)
approximates ?Z? for n  0. By shifting the sequence (pn/qn)n we can assume
that this already occurs for n = 0. We can now repeat the above argument and
construct qn,t for t ? [T,2T ]. After ?nitely many repetitions, we construct qn,t for
all t in [0,1].
8.1.3. QC-surgery towards the center. Suppose now ?1 = 0. In this case we apply
a qc-surgery. As in §8.1.2 we denote by ?0 the multiplier of ?(g0).
Consider the ?rst return map
w0 := gr0,?? gs0,+: H0(G0) ? H0(G0).
It has a unique attracting ?xed point ?0 and a unique critical value at 0. Thus w0
has also a unique critical point. We can choose a small disk D around ?0 such that
• 0 ? w0(D) b D;
• w0: H0(G0)\ D ? H0(G0)\ w0(D) is a 2-to-1 covering map.
By Theorem 6.9, we can project D to a disk within H(g0). We claim that there
is a continuous path of qc maps ? ?t: H0(G0) ? H0(G0) and a continuous path
wt : H0(G0) ? H0(G0) such that
• ??t is equivariant on H0(G0)\ D;
• wt has a unique critical value at 0 and a unique attracting ?xed point at
• ?0,1 = 0; i.e. 0 is supperattracting ?xed point of w1.
Indeed, it is su?cient to construct wt | D and ??t | D equivariant on ?D; pulling
back the Beltrami di?erential of ? ?t | D via the covering map w0 | H0(G0)\ D gives
the Beltrami di?erential for ??t | H0(G0).Applying G0, we spread dynamically the Beltrami form of ?? to obtain a global
qc map ?t : C ? C which is unique up to a?ne rescaling. Spreading dynamically
the surgery, we obtain a continuous path of maximal prepacmen G#n,t. De?ne now
?n,t to be the projection of ? t to the dynamical plane of gn via intS#n ' V \ ?1;
similarly, gn,t is the projection of G#n,t. The argument now continues in the same
way as in §8.1.2.
8.1.4. Lamination around f?. In §8.1.1, §8.1.2, §8.1.3 we constructed continuous
paths qn,t ? Wu,n  0 with R(qn,t) = qn+1,t so that each qn,t has a valuable
?ower H(qn,t) with multiplier ?t, where ?0 = 1.Moreover, H(qn,t) is within a
triangulation (qn) respecting H(qn,t) such that the wall (fn) approximate ?Z?.
For a big m  0, we de?ne Fm,t to be the set of all pacmen close to qm,t such
that the multiplier of ?(qm,t) is ?t. Locally (Fm,t)t is a codimension-one lamination
of B. Since Fm,t is in a small neighborhood of qm,t, every pacman g ? Fm,t has a
valuable ?ower H(g) and a triangulation (g) respecting H(g) such that (g) and
H(g) depend continuously on g. The wall (g) approximates ?Z?.
For n ? m, we de?ne
Fn,t := {g ? B |Rm?n(g) ? Fm,t}.
Since R is hyperbolic,
F := {Fn,t}n,t ? {Ws}(8.2)
forms a codimension-one lamination in a neighborhood of f?. A pacman g ? Fn,t
has H(g) and (g) satisfying the same conditions as above. In particular, all the
pacmen in Fn,t are hybrid conjugate in neighborhoods of their valuable ?owers.
8.1.5. Scaling. By Corollary 3.7, the Siegel map f can be renormalized to a pacman.
By Lemma 7.8 we can assume that the renormalization of f is within a small
neighborhood of f?. This allows us to de?ne an analytic renormalization operator
R2 : U 99KB from a small neighborhood of f to a small neighborhood of f?. Since
maps inW have di?erent multipliers, the image of W under R2 is transverse to the
lamination F, see (8.2).
We de?ne fn,t to be the unique intersection of Fn,t with the image of W under
R2, and we de?ne gn,t ? W to be the preimage of fn,t via R2. Since (fn,t) ap-
proximates ?Z?, the triangulation (fn,t) and the valuable ?ower H(fn,t) have full
lifts (gn,t) and H(gn,t), see Lemma 4.4. Since the holonomy along F is asymptot-
ically conformal [L1, Appendix 2, The ?-lemma (quasi- conformality)], we obtain
the scaling result for gn,t.
8.1.6. Uniqueness of gn,t. Recall (Theorem 7.7) that Wu is parametrized by the
multipliers of the ?-?xed points. Therefore, parabolic pacmen with rotation num-
n  0 are unique. As a consequence the paths of satellite pacmenbers pn/qn,
emerging from these parabolic pacmen are unique. Similarly, parabolic maps gn,0 ?
W with rotation numbers pn/qn are unique; thus the paths gn,t are unique.
Appendix A. Sector renormalizations of a rotation
Consider ? ? R/Z and let
be the corresponding rotation of the closed unit disk by angle ?.
A.1. Prime renormalization of a rotation. Assume that ? 6= 0 and consider
a closed internal ray I of D1. A fundamental sector Y ? D1 of L? is the smallest
closed sector bounded by I and L?(I). If ? = 1/2, then I ? L?(I) is a diameter and
both sectors of D1 bounded by I?L?(I) are fundamental. The angle ? at the vertex
of Y is ? if ? ? [0, 1/2] or 1 ? ? if 1? ? ? [0,1/2].
A fundamental sector is de?ned uniquely up to rotation; let us ?rst rotate it such
that 1 ? D1 \ Y. Set Y? := L?? 1(Y) and set Y+ to be the closure of D1 \ (Y ? Y?),
see Figure 27. Then
L2? | Y?)(L? | Y+,(A.1)
is the ?rst return of points in Y??Y+ back to Y??Y+. The prime renormalization
of L? is the rotation LRprm(?) : D1 ? D1 obtained from (A.1) by applying the gluing
map
L(Ae.m2)ma A.1. We haveRprm(?) =????12?????1if 0 ? ? ? 1,21 ? ? ? 1.if
?2
Present ? using continued fractions in the following ways
? = [0; a1,a2,. .. ] = 1? [0; b1,b2,. .. ].
{with ai,bi ? N>0. Then
[0;a1? 1, a2, .. .]if a1 > 1,
Rprm([0; a1, a2, . . .]) ={1 ? [0; a2, a3 . . .]
if a1 = 1,
and
1? [0; b1 ? 1,b2, . . . ]if b1 > 1,Rprm(1? [0;b1,b2, . .. ]) =
[0; b2,b3 . .. ]if b1 = 1.
As a consequence, ? is periodic under Rprm if and only if there is a ?? with periodic
continued fraction expansion such that ? = Rnprm(??) for some n? 0.
F(seicgtuorreY 2an7.d pLreoftj:ectthse()pLr2?im| Ye?re,noLrm? a| lYiz+a)titoonadneleewtersoatafutinodna. mReingthatl:
Lq?+1 | X? ,Lq? | X+is the ?rst return map to a fundamental
Proof. Follows by routine calculations. If ? ? [0,1/2], then projecting z ? e(?)z
( )by ?prm we obtainz ?(e(?)z1??)1/1??
?
= ez.1 ? ?
If ? ? [1/2, 1], then projzec?tin(ge(z??? 1e)(z???)1/1?)z=bey(?p?r?m 1w)e zo.btain
?
? ? 1 ? [?1, 0]; adding +1 we obtain2? ? 1Observe that.
??
Write
1
? =.
a1 + [0; a2, a3, .. .]
and observe that ? ? [0,1/2] if and only if a1 > 1. (With the exception ? = [0; 1, 1].)
If a1 > 1, then
2? ? 1= 2? a1? [0;a2, a3, . . . ] = Rprm(?).
?
Similarly Rprm(1? [0;b1, b2, . . . ]) is veri?ed.

A.2. Sector renormalization. A sector renormalization R of L? is
• a renormalization sector X presented as a union of two subsectors X?? X+
• naopramiraloizfeidtesroattehsa, tca1ll?ed(Xa?s?ecXto+r;pre-renorm)alization,
z ? z1/?,? : X?? X+ ? D1,
projecting (A.3) to a new rotation Lµ, where ? is the angle of X at 0.
We write RL? = Lµ, and we call a and b the renormalization return times. We
allow one of the sectors X± to degenerate, but not both. Note that the assumption
1? X?? X+; can always be achieved using rotation.
The prime renormalization is an example of a sector renormalization.
Suppose two sector renormalizations R1(L?) = Lµ and R2(Lµ) = L? are given.
The composition R2 ?R1(L?) = L? is obtained by lifting the pre-renormalization
of R2 to the dynamical plane of L?.
Lemma A.2. A sector renormalization is an iteration of the prime renormaliza-
tion.
Proof. Suppose R is a sector renormalization with renormalization return times
Proceed by induction on a + b. If a + b = 3, then R is thea and b as above.
prime renormalization. Otherwise, we project the pre-renormalization of R to the
dynamical plane of Rprm(L?) and obtain the new sector renormalization R? of
Rprm(L?) so that
R? ?Rprm(L?) = R(L?).
The renormalization return times a?,b? of R? satisfy a? + b? < a + b.

Consider again the fundamental sector Y bounded by I and L?(I). There is a
unique a > 0 such that L?a(I) ? Y. Up to rotation, we can assume that L?a(I)
lands at 1. We de?ne X+ to be the subsector of Y bounded I and L?a(I) and we
de?ne X? to be the subsector(of Y bounded L(I) and) L?a(I). Then
is a sector pre-renormalization, called the ?rst return to the fundamental sector, see
Figure 27. We denote by Rfast the associated sector renormalization and we write
µ = Rfast(?) if Rfast(L?) = Lµ.
By Lemma A.2, for every ? 6= 0 there is a unique n(?) such that Rfast(?) =
Rnp(r?m)(?). We note that if ? ? {1/m, 1? 1/m} with m > 1, then n(?) = m? 1. (In
this case the sector X? is degenerate.)
A.3. Renormalization triangulation. Given a sector pre-renormalization (A.3),
a??1b??1the set of sectors
is called a renormalization triangulation of D1. Alternatively, consider the asso-
ciated renormalization Lµ = R(L?). The internal rays towards 1 and Lµ(1) split
D1 into two closed sectors T0 and T1. We call {T?,T+} the basic triangulation of
Lµ. Lifting the sectors T?, T+ via the gluing map, and spreading them dynamically
we obtain the renormalization triangulation. We also say that the renormalization
triangulation is the full lift of the basic triangulation.
Let ?N be the set of angles ? such that ? = [0; a1, a2, .. . ] with |ai| ? N or
? = 1 ? [0; a1, a2, .. .] with |ai| ? N.By Lemmas A.1 and A.2, the set ?Nis
invariant under any sector renormalization.
Lemma A.3. For every N there is a t > 1 with the following property. Consider
the renormalization triangulation associated with some sector renormalization of
L?, where ? ? ?N . Then any two triangles have comparable angles at 0: the ratio
of the angles is between 1/t and t.
Proof. There is a neighborhood U of 1 such that for all ? ? ?N we have L?(1) ? U .
Therefore, both sectors in the basic triangulation have comparable angles at 0
uniformly on ? ? ?N . Since a renormalization triangulation is the full lift of a
basic triangulation, the lemma is proven.
A.4. Periodic case. It follows from Lemmas A.1 and A.2 that L? is a ?xed point
of some sector renormalization if and only if ? ? ?per. Suppose ? ? ?per and choose
a sector renormalization R1 such that R1(L?) = L?. Write Rn := Rn1 and denote
by an, bn and ?n the renormalization return times and the gluing map of Rn. Then
?n = ?1n and there is a matrix(M w)ith positiv(e en)tries such that
ana1= Mn?1(A.4).
bnb1
As a consequence, an, bn have exponentially growth with the same exponent.
We also note that
In this appendix we give a su?cient condition for liftability of arcs under a
sector anti-renormalization.This implies that the sector anti-renormalization is
robust with respect to a particular choice of cutting arcs, see Theorem B.8.
B.1. Robustness of anti-renormalization. Consider a closed pointed topolog-
ical disk (W,0) and let U, V be two closed topological subdisks of W such that
0 ? int(U ? V ). A homeomorphism f : U ? V ?xing 0 is called a partial home-
omorphism of (W, 0) and is denoted by f : W 99K W or f : (W,0) 99K (W,0). If
U = V = W, then f is an actual self-homeomorphism of (W, 0).
B.1.1. Leaves over f : (W, 0) 99K (W, 0). Let ?0, ?1 be two simple arcs connecting
0 to points in ?W such that ?0 and ?1 are disjoint except for 0 and such that
?1 is the image of ?0 in the following sense: ??0 := ?0 ? U and ?1? := ?1 ? V
are simple closed curves such that f maps ??0 to ??1.Such pair ?0, ?1 is called
dividing. Then ?0 ? ?1 splits W into two closed sectors A and B denoted so that
intA,?1,int B, ?0 are clockwise oriented around 0, see the left-hand of Figure 28.
We say that ?0 = `(A) = ?(B) is the left boundary of A and the right boundary
of B and we say that ?1 = ?(A) = `(B) is the right boundary of A and the left
boundary of B.
Let X, Y be topological spaces and let g: X 99K Y be a partially de?ned contin-
uous map. We de?ne
Consider a (?nite or in?nite) sequence (Sk)k, where each Sk is a copy of either
A(B.o1r) B. De?ne thgek p:=ar????????tiaiiffldd?:m::1???a:0??1?0p?????1gk????:1??1?0??(0?Sk)iiii9ffff 9((((KSSSSkkkk`,,,,(SSSSSkkkkk+++++11111)))))?=?=?=?=by((((ABAB,,,, BAAB)))),,.,
The dynamical gluing of (Sk)k is
. .. Sk?1 tgk?1Sk tgkSk+1 tgk+1. .. .
The jump ?(k) from Sk to Sk+1 is set to be 0,0,?1, 1 if (Sk, Sk+1) is a copy of
(A, B), (B,A), (A, A), (B, B) respectively.
For a sequence s = (ai)i?I we denote by s[i] the i-th element in s; i.e. s[i] = ai.
De?nition B.1 (Leaves of f : W 99K W). Suppose s ? {A,B}Z. Set Ws[i] to be a
copy of the closed sector s[i]. The leaf Ws is the surface obtained by the dynamical
gluing of (Ws[i])i?Z.
The projection ?: Ws ? W maps each intWs[i] ? ?(Ws[i]) to int s[i] ? ?(s[i]).
By ??s,i1 : int s[i]??(s[i]) ? intWs[i]??(Ws[i]) we denote the corresponding inverse
branch.
Note that if s[i] = s[i + 1], then ? is discontinuous at Ws[i]? Ws[i + 1]. As z
approaches Ws[i]?Ws[i+1] from int Ws[i], respectively int Ws[i+1], its image ?(z)
approaches ?(s[i]), respectively `(s[i + 1]) 6= ?(s[i]).
WsF\or{0?e}veirsytso,ptohloegreiciasllay uanciqlouseedpohian?ltf-0?pl?anWe.s such that ?(0?) = 0. By construction,
For J ? Z we write Ws[J] =Ws[j].To keep notation simple, we write
B.1.2. Lifts of curves. Let ?: [0,1] ? W \{0} be a curve in W. A lift of ? to Ws
is a curve ??: [0,1] ? Ws such that
• for every t ? [0, 1], there is an n(t) ? Z such that ?(??(t)) = fn(t)(?(t));
• n(0) = 0;
• n(t) is constant for all t for which ??(t) is within some int Ws[i]? ?(Ws[i]);
and
• if ??(t?) ? intWs[i] while ??(t) ? int Ws[i + 1], then n(t)? n(t?) is equal to
the jump from Ws[i] to Ws[i + 1].
In other words, whenever ? crosses the boundary of s[i], the lift of ? is adjusted to
respect the dynamical gluing. Similarly is de?ned a lift of a curve parametrized by
[0, 1). Note that ?(??) is, in general, discontinuous.
For every curve ? as above, there is at most one lift of ? starting at a given
preimage of ?(0) under ? : Ws ? W. It is easy to see that there is an ? > 0 such
that all lifts (speci?ed by the starting points) of ?: [0, ?] ? W exist, and thus
unique. The main question we address is the existence of the global lifts.
If ?: [0, 1) ? W \ {0} is such that ?(1) = lim ?(t) = 0, then we say that a lift
t?1
?? of ? lands at 0? if ?(??(t)) ? 0 as t ? 1.
Figure 28. Left: a homeomorphism f : W ? W and a diving
pair ?0, ?1. Right: the 1/3 anti-renormalization of f (with respect
to the clockwise orientation).
B.1.3. Anti-renormalizations. We will now show that for every p/q there is a unique
anti-renormalization with rotation number p/q.
Lemma B.2. For every q ? N>2 and every p ? {1, 2,. . . , q? 1} coprime with q
there exists a unique q-periodic sequence s ?{A,B}Z such that
• s[0] = A and s[?1] = B;
• for every j ? Z with (j modq) ? {?p,?p? 1}, we have s[j + p] = s[j];
• s[?p ? 1] = A and s[?p] = B.
Proof. Since p and q are coprime, there are unique a, b? {1,2, . . . ,q?1} such that
pa = ?1modq,
pb = 1modq.
Note that a + b = q. We have:
• s[ip + jq] = A for all i ?{0, 1,. . . , a? 1} and all j ? Z; and
• s[?1 + ip + jq] = B for all i? {0,. . . , b? 1} and all j ? Z.

The numbers a,b appearing in the proof of Lemma B.2 are called the renormal-
ization return times.
For a sequence s as in Lemma B.2, let
s/q ? {A, B}Z/qZ,(s/q)[i] := s[i + Zq]
be the quotient sequence, and let Ws/q be the quotient of the leaf Ws by identifying
each Ws[k] with Ws[k + q]. We denote by ?: Ws/q ? W the natural projection.
Then the p/q-anti-renormalization f?1 : Ws/q 99K Ws/q is de?ned as follows (see
Figure 28):
• for every j 6? {?p ? 1,?p}, the map f?1 : Ws/q[j] ? Ws/q[j + p] is the
natural isomorphism;
• the map f?1: Ws/q[?p? 1,?p] 99K Ws/q[?1, 0] is f : W \ ?0 99K W \ ?1.
Note that p/q is the clockwise rotation number.
f?b1 | Ws/q[?1]) is t(he ?rst retu)rn of f?1By construction, (f?a1| Ws/q[0],
back to Ws/q[?1, 0]. After appropriate gluing of arcs in ? Ws/q[?1, 0] , the map
(f?a1 | Ws/q[0],f?b1 | Ws/q[?1]) is f : W 99K W.
Denote by
?0s/q,?ps/q(B.2)
the left boundaries of Ws/q[0] and Ws/q[p] respectively. Then ?s0/q, ?ps/q is a dividing
pair for f?1 : Ws/q 99K Ws/q and the anti-renormalization procedure can be iterated.
Let ? be a curve in W and let ?? be a lift of ? to Ws.The image of ?? in
Ws/q ' Ws/ ? is called a lift of ? to Ws/q. For example, ?0s/q is a lift of ?0.
B.1.4. Prime anti-renormalization. The 1/3 and 2/3-anti-renormalizations are called
prime. It is easy to check that
• if p/q = 1/3, then s/q = (A, A, B);
• if p/q = 2/3, then s/q = (A, B,B).
Lemma B.3 (Compare with Lemma A.2). Any anti-renormalization is an iteration
of prime anti-renormalizations.

Denote by s• := (A, B)Z the sequence in {A,B}Z with even entries equal to A
and odd entries equal to B. Simplifying notations, we write Ws• = W•.
Suppose that f : W ? W is a homeomorphism. In this case anti-renormalizations
of f can be de?ned canonically (i.e. independent of the choice of ?0,?1) as follows.
Observe ?rst that
?: W•\ {0?} ? W \{0}(B.3)
ilsefat utonivriegrhsat lscuocvhert.hLatetW(??••i[i]?isWb•e)tiw?Zeebne??a•illatnhed l??ifi•t+s1o; fi?n0paanrdtic?u1laenr,um??i•eriasteadliffrtomof
?imod 2. Let
f? , f+ : W• ? W•
be the lifts of f : W ? W speci?ed so that
f?(??•2i) = ??2•i?1f+(??2•i) = ??•2i+1.and
Observe that f? and f+ commute. Write
? := f??1 ? f+ : W• ? W•;
then ? | (W•\{0?}) is a deck transform(ation of W?) and we can rewrite (B.3) as
f?1,? : W•[2] ? W•[0]Figure 29. Illustration to Lemma B.3:
?andf?1,+ : W•[0,1]W•[1,2]becomethe1/3-anti-
renormalization of f after gluing ??0• and ??3•; see also Figure 28.
W•\ {0?} /???1?
as a punctured closed topological disk and we view W•/???1? as a closed topological
disk.
Let f?1: W?1 ? W?1 be the 1/3-anti-renormalization of f. Then f?1 is conju-
gate to
f?1,?/???1? = f?1,+/???1? : W•/???1? ? W•/???1?
by the conjugacy
Proof. Clearly, W•[0,1, 2] is a fundamental domain for ??1. It is easy to see (see
Figure 29) that h identi?es
• f?1 : W?1[0]? W?1[1] (which is id: A? A) with
f?1,? = ??1 : W•[2] ? W•[0].
• f?1 : W?1[1,2] ? W?1[2, 0] (which is f : W \ ?0 ? W \ ?1) with
f?1,+: W•[0, 1] ? W•[1, 2].

Remark B.5. The proof of Lemma B.4 shows also that h is uniquely characterized
by the following properties:
• h maps ?s0/3 to ??2•/??? (see (B.2));• isfta`r?tinWg a\t{s0o}miespaoicnutrvoef ?st0sa/r3t,inthgeanth?(0˜?/a?n?d?1˜??)??WW?1• iiss tthhee uunniiqquuee lliifftt ooff ``
starting at ??2•.
Similar to Lemma B.4 we have
f?1,+ :=? = f+? f??1,
f?1,? :=f?,
??1 :=f??11,? ? f?1,+ = f??2 ? f+,
Then ??1 acts properly discontin(uously on)W•\{0?}. We view
W•\ {0?} /???1?
as a punctured closed topological disk and we view W•/???1? as a closed topological
disk.
Let f?1: W?1 ? W?1 be the 2/3-anti-renormalization of f. Then f?1 is conju-
gate to
f?1,?/???1? = f?1,+/???1? : W•/???1? ? W•/???1?
by the conjugacy

B.1.5. Fences. Consider again a partial homeomorphism f : W 99K W and let s be
an anti-renormalization sequence from Lemma B.2. We view W as a subset of C.
A fence is a simple closed curve Q? Domf ? Im f such that
• 0 is in the bounded component ? of C\ Q; and
• Q intersects ?0 at a single point x and Q intersects ?1 at f(x).
Let f?1: Ws/q 99K Ws/q be an anti-renormalization of f?1 as in §B.1.3. We
denote by Qs the lift of Q to Ws and we denote by Qs/q the projection of Qs to
Ws/q.
Lemma B.7. The curve Qs/q is again a fence respecting ?0s/q,?ps/q; see (B.2).
Proof. Every Qs/q ? Ws/q[i] is an arc connecting a point on the left boundary of
Ws/q[i] to a point on the right boundary of Ws/q[i]. Moreover, Qs/q?Ws/q[i] meets
Qs/q?Ws/q[i+1] because gk : ?(Si) 99K `(Si+1) (see (B.1)) respects the intersection
of Q with ?0, ?1.
Theorem B.8. Let f : W 99K W be a partial homeomorphism, ?0,?1 ? W be a
dividing pair of arcs, Q ? Domf be a fence respecting ?0,?1 and enclosing ? 3 0,
and let
f?1 : W?1 99K W?1
be the p/q-anti-renormalization of f; see §B.1.3.
Assume that ?0new, ?n1ew is another pair of dividing arcs such that ?0new \ ?, ?1new \ ?
coincides with ?0 \ ?, ?1 \ ?. Denote by
the p/q-anti-renormalization of f relative to the pair ?n0ew, ?n1ew. Then f?1and
f?1,new are naturally conjugate by h: W?1 ? W?1,new uniquely speci?ed by the
following properties:
(1) ?? h(z) = ?(z) for every z ? W?1\ ??1, where ??1 is the topological disk
enclosed by Q?1, see Lemma B.7; and
(2) if ?? ? W?1 is a lift of a curve ? ? W, then h(??) is a lift of ? to W?1,new.
Proof. Since the pair ?n0ew \ ?, ?n1ew \ ? coincides with ?0\ ?,?1 \?, Condition (1)
uniquely speci?es h | W?1 \ ??1.
Let us now extend f : W 99K W to a homeomorphism f : W ? W mapping ?0
to ?1. The extension changes f?1 | W?1\ ??1 and f?1,new | W?1,new \??1,new but
does not a?ect f?1 | ??1 and f?1,new | ??1,new. Therefore, it is su?cient to prove
the theorem under the assumption that f : W ? W is a homeomorphism.
Since every anti-renormalization is an iteration of prime anti-renormalizations
(see Lemma B.3), we can further assume that f?1and f?1,neware prime anti-
renormalizations.By Lemmas B.4 and B.6 both f?1 and f?1,new are naturally
conjugate to
f?1,?/???1? = f?1,+/???1?: W•/???1? ? W•/???1?,
which is independent on the choice of ?0,?1. It remains to observe that the conju-
gacy between f?1 and f?1,new satis?es Condition 2 – see Remark B.5.
Corollary B.9 (Lifting(condition)). The cur(ves ?0,new) and ?1,new have unique lifts
h?1?0s/q,newh?1?sp/q,new? W?1(B.4),
(see (B.2)) such that the pair (B.4) coincide with ?s0/q, ?sp/q in W?1 \ ?. More-
over, (B.4) is a dividing pair.
B.2. Lifting theorem. In this subsection we give a su?cient condition for lifta-
bility of arcs to leaves. This gives an alternative “manual” proof of Theorem B.8.
Theorem B.15 is not used directly elsewhere in the paper.
As before, we consider a partial homeomorphism f : (W,0) 99K (W, 0) and we
assume that ?0, ?1 is a dividing pair of curves. We also view W as a subset of C.
A wall around 0 respecting ?0,?1 is either a closed annulus or a simple closed
curve Q ? U ? V such that
(1) C\Q has two connected components. Moreover, denoting by ? the bounded
component of C\ Q, we have 0 ? ?.
(2) ?0 ? Q and ?1? Q are connected.
(3) if x ? ?, then f±1(x) ? Q ? ?.
In other words, points in W do not jump over Q under the iteration of f . If Q is a
simple closed curve, then f restricts to an actual homeomorphism f : ? ? ?.
Remark B.10. Note that a wall contains a fence, see §B.1.5. Therefore, in the
statement of Theorem B.8 we can replace a fence with a wall.
For a sequence s? {A, B}Z we denote by Qs and ?s the closures of the preimages
of Q and ? under ? : Ws ? W . We denote by Qs[i] and ?s[i] the intersections of
Qs and ?s with Ws[i].
Lemma B.11. The set Qs is connected. The closure of the connected component
of Ws \ Qs containing 0? is ?s.
Proof. Follows from the de?nition: since points in ? do not jump over Q every
Qs[i] intersects Qs[i + 1], therefore Qs is connected and the claim follows.
Suppose f?1: Ws/q ? Ws/q is an anti-renormalization of f and suppose W has
a wall Q (respected by ?0, ?1, f) enclosing ?. The image of Qs in Ws/q is called the
full lift Qs/q of Q. Similarly, we denote by ?s/q the image of ?s in Ws/q. We say
that Q is an N-wall if it take at least N iterates of f±1 for points in ? to cross Q.
It follows by de?nition that:
Lemma B.12. If Q is an N-wall, then Qs/q is an (N ? 1) min{a, b}-wall.
Since for a periodic combinatorics min{a, b} ? 2 (see (A.5)), we have:

Corollary B.13. Suppose f?1 : Ws/q ? Ws/q is an anti-renormalization of f as-
sociated with a periodic combinatorics, see §A.4. Then a lift of a 2-wall (respected
by ?0, ?1, f) is again a 2-wall.
Let ?0, ?1 := f(?0) ? W be two simple curves ending at 0 such that they are
disjoint away from 0. We say that ?0,?1 respect (Q, ?0, ?1) if
(1) ?0, ?1 start outside of ?? Q;
(2) ?0, ?1 do not intersect (?0? ?1)\ ?; and
(3) ?0? Q and ?1? Q are connected subset of di?erent connected components
of Q\ (?0 ? ?1).
If we think that the components of Q\ (?0 ? ?1) are gates of the wall Q, then (3)
says that ?0, ?1 enter ? through di?erent gates.
Remark B.14. We can slightly relax Conditions (2) and (3) to allow ?0,?1 to
touch (but not cross-intersect) ?0,?1 in W \ ?. For example, we can allow ?0\ ? =
?0 \ ? and ?1 \ ? = ?1 \ ?.
We say that a sequence s is mixed if (A, B) or (B, A) appears in?nitely many
times in both s[? 0] and s[? 0].
Theorem B.15 (Lifting of curves). Let f : W 99K W be a partial homeomorphism,
let Q ? W be a wall respecting ?0,?1, and let ?0,?1 = f(?0) be a pair of curves
respecting (Q,?0,?1). Let s? {A, B}Z be a sequence of a mixed type. Then all lifts
of ?0, ?1 in Ws exist, are pairwise disjoint, and land at 0?.
Proof. We split the proof into short subsections.
B.2.1. Notations and Conventions. As in §B.1.4 we denote by s• := (A, B)Z the
sequence in {A, B}Zwith even entries equal to A and odd entries equal to B.
Simplifying notations, we write Ws• = W•, ?s•= ?•, and Qs• = Q•. We note
that ?: ?• \ {0?} ? ? \ {0} and ?: Q• ? Q are universal coverings.However,
? : W• \ {0?} ? W \{0} needs not be a covering map: the sectors of W• are glued
through ?i? and not through ?i.
Denote by U• and V• the preimages of U and V under ?: W• ? W . The map
f : U\{0} ? V\{0} admits a lift f? : U•\{0?} ? V•\{0?} unique up to the action of the
group of decks transformation, which is isomorphic to Z. We always set f?(0?) := 0?
– this is a continuous extension. We often write f? as a partial homeomorphism
W• 99K W•, and call it a lift of f : W 99K W.
We specify two lifts f?? , f?+: W• 99K W• of f as follows
• f?? maps ?(W•[1]) (which is a copy of ?0) to `(W•[1]);
• f?+ maps ?(W•[1]) to ?(W•[2]).
To simplify notation, we omit the tilde: f? = f?? and f+ = f?+. Note that f?, f+?1
move points slightly to the left, while f+, f??1 move points slightly to the right.
We make the following assumptions. We assume that ?0 starts and thus crosses
the wall in A while ?1 starts and thus crosses the wall in B. We also assume that
s[0] = A. All other cases are completely analogous.
We parametrize all the lifts of ?0, ?1 in Ws by starting points: for i ? Z we
denote by ??i = ??is the lift of ?0 (if s[i] = A) or of ?1 (if s[i] = B) starting in Ws[i].
Recall that every lift ??i exists locally around its starting point. We will show that
??0 exists and lands at 0?, by a completely analogous argument all ??i exist and land
at 0?.
Similarly we parametrize all the lifts of ?0, ?1 in W• by starting points: we denote
by ??i• the lift of ?0 (if i is even) or of ?1 (if i is odd) starting at a point in W•[i].
Since ? : ?•\{0?} ? ?\{0} is a universal cover, all ??i• exist, pairwise disjoint, and
land at 0?.
We also write ??i = ?(Ws[i? 1]) and ??i• = ?(W•[i ? 1]). (By construction, ??i• is
a lift of ?0 or of ?1 under ? : W• ? W.)
B.2.2. Example: clockwise spiraling. Let us illustrate the idea of the proof in the
case when ?0 and ?1 spiral clockwise around 0, see the left-hand of Figure 30. Take
the following 5-periodic sequence:
?k ? Z.s[5k,5k + 1,5k + 2,5k + 3, 5k + 4] = (A,A,A,B, B)
Let us inductively construct the curves ??(k), as it is illustrated on the right part
of Figure 30:
• ??? is the sub-curve of ??•0 (a lift of ?0) on the right of ??1•. Since s[0, 1] =
(A,A) consider f+?1(???). (The curve ??? is in the domain of f+?1 because ???
is below the wall.)
Figure 30. Left: ?0 and ?1 spiral clockwise around 0. Right: the
curve ??(k+1) is f±?1(??(k)) truncated by an appropriate ??•` .
• ???? is the sub-curve of f+?1(???) on the right of ??•1. Since s[1,2] = (A, A)
consider f+?1(????). (The curve ???? is in the domain of f+?1 because ???? is
below ???.)
• ??(3) is the sub-curve of f+?1(????) on the right of ??2• – the subindex is 2
because s[2, 3] = (A, B) but s[3,4] = (B, B).
• Since s[3,4] = (B,B) we consider next f?(??(3)). (The curve ??(3) is in the
domain of f? because ??(3) is below ????. )
• ??(4) is the subcurve of f?(??(3)) on the right of ??3• – the subindex is 3 because
s[4, 5] = (B, A) but s[5,6] = (A,A).
• Since s[5, 6] = (A, A), we consider next f+?(??(4)).
T˜?3h:eD=ec?fon?nse(t??nr(uo3c)w)ti\o˜?0n??:(c=4o),n??.t•0.in.\,u??aens?,dby`˜?i1p:=:e=ri?of(d+?˜?iic1)i(,t??ys?.e)e\t??h?e?,upper part of Figure 31. Then the˜?2 := f+?1(????) \ ??(3),
curve ??0 is the concatenation (see the bottom part of Figure 31) of
• ??s,01(`0); followed by
• ??s,11(`1) – because f?1 maps the end point of `0 to the starting point of `1
(recall that s[0, 1] = (A, A)); followed by
• ??s,21(`2 ? A) – because f?1 maps the end point of `1 to the starting point
of `2; followed by
• ??s,31(`2 ? B) – because s[2, 3] = (A, B); followed by
• ??s,41(`3 ? B) – because f maps the end point of `2 to the starting point of
`3; followed by
• ??s,41(`3 ? A) – because s[4,5] = (B, A).
The construction continues by periodicity.
Note that `1 ? ? ? Q (`1 can intersect Q) and `1 is disjoint from `0. The curve
`2 ? A is separated by `1 from Q while `2? B is separated by the continuation of
`1 from Q. By induction, all `i are well de?ned.
Figure 32. Only ?0? (A? f(A)? f2(A)? .. .) is liftable to Ws
if s = (. .. , A, A,A,. .. ).
?(jL)e?t ?+•[??(.j)T]?heQre•fo[?r(ej, )e]vbeerythze?st??r•0ipewvehnetruea˜?lljysetascratsp.esSitnocea sceirstaminixi˜?njgu, nwdeerhathvee
iteration of
f+?1,f+?1,f+?1,f+?1,f?,f?, .. .Trighhist sahnodwsthtehyatar??e0ailsl abecloowmp??le•0t,ethlieftcoufrv?e0s\˜?j{0t}e.ndSitnoce0?.thTehceurrevfoerse˜?,j`itetnedndtototh0e;
i.e. ??0 lands at 0?.
B.2.3. Example: no mixing condition. Let us illustrate that Theorem B.15 fails if
s is not mixing. Suppose s = (.. . ,A, A, A, . . . ). Choose f : W 99K W as it shown
on Figure 32: the curves ?i = f i(?0) accumulate at ?? and the sector between ?0
and ?? (counting clockwise) is the concatenation
A ? f(A)? f2(A)? . . . =: X
B.2.4. Combinatorics of jumps. We now adapt the argument form §B.2.2 to a pos-
sibility that ??0 oscillates at 0?. We start by introducing additional notations.
We de?ne the following quantities. Recall ?rst that for j ? Z the jump is de?ned
while for j < 0 de?ne
?(j) =? #{k ? {j + 1,. . . , 0} | ?(k) = 1},
µ(j) =? #{k ? {j + 1,. . . , 0} | ?(k) =?1},(B.6)
?(j) =? #{k ? {j + 1,. . . , 0} | ?(k) = 0}.
In particular, µ(j) + ?(j) + ?(j) = j for all j 6= 0. We also write µ(0) = ?(0) =
?(0) = 0.
For i < j we de?ne the jump from Ws[i] to Ws[j] to be the sum of jumps from
Ws[i + k] to Ws[i + k + 1] with k ranging from 0 to j ? i? 1. The jump from Ws[j]
to Ws[i] is de?ned to be the negative of the jump from Ws[i] to Ws[j]. It follows
from de?nitions:
Proof. If ??0(t) ? intWs[k]? ?(Ws[k]), then by de?nition of the lift of a curve and
by Claim 1 we have ?(??0(t)) = f ?(k)?µ(k)(?0(t)). This is the ?rst equality in (B.7).
The second equality holds because f??(k) ? f+?µ(k) is a lift of f?(k)?µ(k).
Since s is of mixed type, we obviously have:
Claim 3. If j ? ±?, then ?(j) ? ±? respectively.
B.2.5. Basic dynamical properties. For X ? W and n ? Z, we write
fn(X) = fn (X ? Dom fn) .
Claim 4. For n? Z we have
fn(?0) ? fn+1(?0) = {0} andfn(?0)? fn+1(?0) = {0}.
Proof. Follows from ?0? ?1 = {0} = ?0? ?1 and the assumption that f is a partial
homeomorphism.
Claim 5. The curve ??0•? ?• is in the domains of f±±1 (for any choice of “+” and
“?”). Moreover, we have:
((12)) ff+??1(??(??•1•1????••) )??W??•0•[,?1, 0] ? ?•[?1,0],((34)) ff+??1(??(•0??•0????•)•)????•1W,•[0, 1]? ?•[0, 1].
Proof. Recall that the lifts f+ and f? are speci?ed so that f+?1 and f? move points
slightly to the left while f+ and f??1 move points slightly to the right. Therefore,

B.2.6. Gulfs D>0 and D<0. Let us de?ne the gulf D>0 to be the closed region in
?•[> 0] located on the right of ??1• = ?(W•[0]) and on the left of ??0•. We recall that
both ??1• (and similarly ??0•) decomposes ?• into two connected components; thus
D>0 is well de?ned. Similarly, the gulf D<0 is the closed region in ?•[< 0] located
on the left of ??•0 and on the right of ??•0 .
Claim 6. Both D>0 and D<0 are in the domains of f±±1 (for any choice of “+”
and “?”). Moreover, we have:
(1) f+?1 (D>0) ? D>0 ? ?•[0]? Q•[0],
(2) f? (D>0) ? D>0 ? ?•[?1,0]? Q•[?1,0],
(3) f+ (D<0) ? D<0 ? ?•[0]? Q•[0],
(4) f??1 (D>0) ? D<0 ? ?•[0, 1] ? Q•[0, 1].
Proof. The ?rst claim follows from D>0 ? D<0 ? ?•. Statements (1)–(4) follow
from Statements (1)–(4) of Claim 5 respectively. Indeed, by de?nition, f+?1(D>0)
is bounded by f+?1(??•1 ? D>0)? ??0• and by f+?1(??•0 ? D>0); this implies (1). Other
Statements are analogous.
B.2.7. Channels Dk, D?k, Tk, T?k. Let us now apply inductively f+?µ(k) ? f??(k) to
D>0; on each step we de?ne Dk as the set of points that escape to W•[?(k)], see
Figure 33 and its caption.
Consider ?rst the case k = 1.If s[1] = A, then ?(1) = 0,µ(1) = 1, and
?(1) = 0. In this case (see Figure 33) we de?ne
T>0 := f+?1(D>0, )
T1 := T>0 ? W [0],
D1 := f+(T1),
T>1 := T>0 \ T1,
D>1 := f+(T>1).
If s[1] = B, then ?(1) = 0,µ(k) = 0, and ?(1) = 1. In this case we de?ne
T>0 := D>0,
T1 = D1 := T>0? ?[1],
T>1 = D>1 := T>0\ T1.
In general, for k > 0 we set inductively
Tk :=f+?µ(k) ? f??(k)(D>k?1)? W•[?(k)],
Figure 34. The region Dk is the set of points in D>0 that escape
to ?•[?(k)] under f+?µ(k) ? f??(k).The region D>k is the set of
points in D>0 on the right of Dk.
and similarly, for k < 0, we set
T?k :=f+?µ(?k)? f??(?k)(D<?k+1)? W•[?(?k)],
D?k :=f+µ(?k) ? f???(?k)(T?k),
T<?k?1 :=T<?k \ T?k?1,
Twheesacyastehast[?T1k,,0D, 1k] a=re(Ach,aAnn,Aels). isThine Fchigaunrneel3s3T. kWpelaycatlhl eDr>okle,Dof<?thkegcuulfrsv,esan˜?dk
from §B.2.2.
By an easy induction f+?µ(k)? f??(k)(D>k) ? D>0 for k > 0; thus by Claim 6 the
gulf D>k is in the domain of f+?µ(k+1) ? f??(k+1). Similarly, D<?k is in the domain
For k 6= 0 write `(Tk) := `(W•[?(k)])? Tk and ?(Tk) := ?(W•[?(k)]) ? Tk.
Claim 7. The gulfs D>0 and D<0 are the unions D1?D2?D3?.. . and D?1?D?2?
D?3? . .. respectively. Moreover, Di?Dj = ? if |i? j|? 0. Write ? := Dk ? Dk+1
for k ? {?1,0}. Then
Proof. We will verify the claim for D>0; the case of D<0 is similar.
the point f+?µ(k) ? f??(k)(z) is on the right ofBy induction, if for z ? D>0
W•[?(k)], then f+?µ(k+1) ? f??(k+1)(z) is ether on the right of W•[?(k + 1)] or
f+?µ(k+1) ? f??(k+1)(z) ? W•[?(k + 1)]. Thus points in D>k do not jump over Tk+1
under one iteration. Recall that f+?1 and f? move points to the left. By Claim 3,
?(k) ? +?.?Therefore, every point in D>0 eventually escapes to some Tk
W•[?(k)]. Let us now show that a point in D>0 escapes to at most two (neighbor-
ing) Tkth.
For k > 0 the channel Tk = f+?µ(k)? f??(k)(Dk) is on the left of f+?µ(k)? f??(k)(??•0),
On the other hand, f+?µ(k) ?on the left of ???•(k)+1, and on the right of ??•?(k).
This proves that a point in D>0 escapes to at most two Tkth; it also veri?es the
?rst identity. Similarly, the second identity is veri?ed.
B.2.8. The natural map from D<0 ? ?•[0]? Q•? D>0 to Ws. For convenience, let
us extend by continuity the map ??s,1i : ints[i] ? ?(s[i]) ? int Ws[i] ? ?(Ws[i]) to
?s?,i1 : s[i] ? Ws[i].
We de?ne the map ?0: ?•[0] ? Q•[0] ? ?s[0]? Qs[0] to be ?s?,01 ? ?. For k 6=
? Ws[k] as f+?µ(k) ? f??(k) : Dk ? Tk, followed by0 we de?ne the map ?k: Dk
? : Tk ? s[k]? W , and followed by ??s,1k : s[k] ? Ws[k]. Combining ?k and ?0 we
obtain the map
?: D<0 ? ?•[0]? Q•[0]? D>0 ? Ws
such that ? | Dk = ?k and ? | ?•[0]?Qs[0] = ?0. We note that there is no ambiguity
on Dk ? Dk+1:
Claim 8. The map ? is a homeomorphism on its image. Furthermore, for every
curve
?: [0, 1] ? D<0? ?•[0]? Q•[0]? D>0
starting in ?•[0]? Q•[0], the lift of ?(?) starting in ?s[0]? Qs[0] exists and is equal
to ?(?).
Proof. It is routine to check that ?k and ?j agree on Dom?k? Dom?j =?. Indeed,
if |k ? j| > 1, then Dom ?k ? Dom ?j = ? by Claim 7. If j = k + 1, then writing
? := Dom?k ? Dom ?k+1, we check (see again Claim 7) that ?k | ? = ?k+1 | ?
and ?k(?) ? Ws[k] ? Ws[k + 1]. Since ?k and ?j have disjoint images away from
Dom?k ? Dom?j, we obtain that ? is a homeomorphism.
By the de?nition, Im(?k) ? Ws[k] and f+µ(k)?f???(k) transfers Dk to Ws[k] – this
is the correct number of iterations, see Claim 2 and (B.7). Therefore, ?(?) is the
lift of ?(?) starting in Q•[0] ? ?•[0].
Proof. By Claim 8, ??0 = ?(??•0) exists. By a similar argument all ??m exist; let us
give a brief sketch. For every ??m• de?ne D?>m to be the closed region on the left of
??m• and on the right of ??•m+1, de?ne D?<m to be the closed region on the right of
??m• and on the left of ??m• . As in §B.2.4 specify the quantities ?(k), µ(k), ?(k) with
the only di?erence is that the count in (B.5) starts from m + 1 instead of 1 (and
similar in (B.6)). By the same argument as for ??0 we construct
?? : D<m ? ?•[m]? Q•[m]? D>m ? Ws
such that Claim 8 (with necessary adjustments) holds for ??m.
Proof. By Claim 10 all ??i land at 0?; therefore, every ??i disconnects ?s into two
connected components. It follows from Claims 2 and 4 that ??i,??i+1 are disjoint.
Since ??i?1 is on the left from ??i while ??i+1 is on the right from ??i, we obtain that
??i?1 and ??i+1 are also disjoint. Repeating the argument, we obtain that all ??i are
pairwise disjoint.

B.2.9. Proof of Theorem B.8. Let D ? W \{0} be a topological disk. A lift of D
to Ws is de?ned in the same way as a lift of a curve, see §B.1.2. Alternatively, a
lift ?: D ? Ws of D is characterized by the property that if ? ? D is a curve, then
?(?) is the lift of ? ? D starting in D. A lift of D to Ws/q is the projection of a
lift of D to Ws.
Since ?0new\ ?,?1new\ ? coincide with ?0 \ ?, ?1 \ ?, Condition (1) uniquely
speci?es h | Ws/q \ ?s/q.
Since the pair ?n0ew, ?1new is dividing, it splits W into two closed sectors, call
them Anew and Bnew speci?ed so that Anew\? = A\ ? and Bnew\? = B\?. We
need to show that all lifts of Anew and Bnew to Ws/q exist. By Theorem B.15 (see
also Remark B.14), all lifts of ?0new, ?n1ew to Ws exist, pairwise disjoint, and land at
0?. Projecting to Ws/q, we obtain that all lifts of ?0new,?1new to Ws/q exist, pairwise
disjoint, and land at 0. The lifts of ?0new,?n1ew split Ws/q into q closed sectors; each
of them is a lift of either Anew or Bnew. Mapping this lifts of Anew or Bnew to the
corresponding sectors of Ws/q,new, we obtain a required h.
Since a lift of a curve (if it exists) is uniquely speci?ed by a starting point, the
conjugacy h is unique.
Remark B.16. Anti-renormalization can easily be de?ned for a partial branched
covering f0 : (W, 0) 99K (W, 0) of any degree. In this case it is natural to assume
that ?0 does not contain a critical point of f. To apply Theorem B.8, it is su?cient
to assume that there is a univalent fence Q (respected by ?0, ?1,f) enclosing ? such
that f | Q? ? has degree one. The anti-renormalization is robust with respect to a
replacement ?0, ?1 with a new pair ?0new,?1new as above.
Figure 35. Possible local dynamics at the ?-?xed point.
Appendix C. The molecule conjecture
Let us denote by Mol the main molecule of the Mandelbrot set; i.e. Mol is
the smallest closed subset of M containing the main hyperbolic component as well
as all hyperbolic components obtained from the main component via parabolic
bifurcations; see [DH1, L2] for the background on the Mandelbrot set.In this
appendix we write fc(z) = z2 + c.
is hybrid equivalent to a quadratic polynomial fRprm(c) with c ? LRprm(p/q). This
de?nes the map Rprm :Lp/q 99KLRprm(p/q).
In general, Rprm : Lp/q 99K LRprm(p/q) depends on the choice of ?0. However, if
c ? Mp/q, then Rprm(c) ? MRprm(p/q) and Rprm : Mp/q ? MRprm(p/q) coincides
with the canonical homeomorphism between small copies of the Mandelbrot set.
Remark C.1. The Branner–Douady surjery has also been studied by Riedl [R]; he
showed, in particular, that every dyadic Misiurewicz parameter is connected through
a simple arc (vein) in the Mandelbrot set to the origin.
C.2. The molecule and the fast molecule maps. Denote by ? the main hy-
perbolic component of M. Recall that a parameter c ? ?? is parametrized by
the multiplier e(?(c)) of its non-repelling ?xed point. We de?ne the molecule map
Rprm : M 99K M such that
• Rprm : Lp/q 99K LRprm(p/q) is the Branner–Douady renormalization map for
p/q 6= 0/1 and for some choice of ?0; and
• if c ? ??, t?h(eRnpRrmp(rmc)()c=) i??????s s12o???t(h(cc?)a)(t?c)1if 0 ? ?(c) ? 1,21 ? ?(c) ? 1.if
?(c)2
Siegel parameters of periodic type are exactly periodic points of Rprm | ??
(Lemma A.2). Furthermore, for a satellite copy of the Mandelbrot set Ms, there
is an n ? 1 such that Rnprm: Ms ? M is the Douady-Hubbard straightening map.
The map Rprm: M 99K M is combinatorially modeled by Q(z) := z(z +1)2, see
Figure 36. The latter map has a unique parabolic ?xed point as 0. The attracting
basin of 0 contains exactly one critical point of Q. The second critical point is
a preimage of 0.Denote by F the invariant Fatou component of Q.We can
extend Rprm to ? so that Rprm | ? is conjugate, say by ?, to Q | F . Then ?
extends uniquely to a monotone continuous map ? : Mol ? KQ semi-conjugating
Rprm | Mol and Q | KQ, where KQ is the ?lled-in Julia set of Q:
If the MLC-conjecture holds, then ? is a homeomorphism.
For every c ? ??\{cusp} de?ne n(c) := n(?c), where ?c is the rotation number
of fc and n(?) is speci?ed by Rfast(?) = Rnp(r?m)(?), see §A.2. For every c ? Lp/q
de?ne n(c) := n(cp/q), where cp/q is the root of Lp/q. The fast Molecule map is a
partial map on M de?ned by
Rfast(c) = Rnp(rcm)(c).
The restriction Rfast | ?Mol\{cusp} is continuous but it does not extend contin-
uously to the cusp: Rfast(?M1/n) = ?M.
Figure 36. Left: the Mandelbrot set. Right: the ?lled Julia set
of Q(z) = z(z + 1)2.
C.3. The Molecule Conjecture. Given a renormalization operator R: B 99K
B, its renormalization horseshoe is the set of points in B with bi-in?nite pre-
compact orbits. We conjecture that there is a pacman renormalization operator
Rfast: BMol ? BMol with the following properties. The operator Rfast is hyper-
bolic and piecewise analytic with one-dimensional unstable direction such that its
renormalization horseshoe Rfast : HMol ? HMol is compact and combinatorially
associated with Rfast | Mol\{cusp} as follows.
There is a continuous surjective map ?: HMol ? Mol that is a semi-conjugacy
away from the cusp:
.
Denote by ?irrMol the set of non-parabolic parameters in ?Mol. Conjecturally,
Rfast | HMol is the natural extension of Rfast | ?Mol\{cusp} compacti?ed by
adding limits to parabolic parameters at all possible directions. Such construction
is known as a parabolic enrichment, see [La, D2].
The space BMol has a codimension-one stable lamination (Fcs)c?Mol such that
all pacmen in Fcs are hybrid conjugate to fc in neighborhoods of their “mother
hedgehogs”, see §C.4. For every f ? HMol, the leaf F?s(f) is a stable manifold
of Rfast at f. The unstable manifold of Rfast at f is parametrized by a parabolic
enrichment of a neighborhood of ?(f). Locally, Rfast can be factorize as an iterate
of Rprm : BMol ? BMol; however the latter operator has parabolic behavior at
??1(cusp).
The Molecule Conjecture contains both Theorem 7.7 (for periodic type parame-
ters from ??) and the Inou-Shishikura theory [IS] (for high type parameters from
??). It also implies the local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set for all parameters
on the main (and thus any) molecule.
C.4. Conjecture on the upper semicontinuity of the mother hedgehog. A
closely related conjecture is the upper semicontinuity of the mother hedgehog. For
a non-parabolic parameter c ? ??, consider the closed Siegel disk Zc of fc; if fc
has a Cremer point, then Zc := {?}. If Zc contains a critical point, then we set
Hc := Zc. Otherwise, fc has a hedgehog (see [PM]): a compact closed connected
?lled-in forward invariant set H? % Zc such that fc : H? ? H? is a homeomorphism.
We de?ne Hc to be the mother hedgehog (see [Chi]): the closure of the union of all
of the hedgehogs of fc.
Recall that the ?lled-in Julia set Kg of a polynomial depends upper semicon-
tinuously on g. Thinking of Hc as an indi?erent-dynamical analogue of Kg, we
conjecture:
Conjecture C.2. The mother hedgehog Hc depends upper semicontinuously on c.
For bounded type parameters (i.e. when Hc is a Siegel quasidisk) Conjecture C.2
follows from the continuity of the Douady-Ghys surgery.
Conjecture C.2 can be adjusted for parabolic parameters c ? ? as follows. Let
Ac be the immediate attracting basin of the parabolic ?xed point ?. Then there is
a choice of a valuable ?ower Hc with Hc ? Ac?{?} such that Hc depends upper
semicontinuously on c ? ??. For example, Hc is the union of all limiting mother
hedgehogs for perturbations of fc.
Similarly, Conjecture C.2 can be adjusted for all parameters in ?Mol.Our
result on the control of the valuable ?ower (see Theorem 8.2) can be thought as a
partial case of this general conjecture.
Conjecture C.2 and its generalizations describe in a convenient way how an
attracting ?xed point bifurcates into repelling. An important consequence is control
of the post-critical set: if a perturbation of fc is within Mol, then the new post-
critical set is within a small neighborhood of Hc. A statement of this sort (for
parabolic parameters approximating a Siegel polynomial) was proven by Bu? and
Che?ritat, see [BC, Corollary 4]. This was a necessary ingredient in constructing a
Julia set with positive measure.
