Title:
Con?dence reports in decision-making with
multiple alternatives violate the Bayesian
con?dence hypothesis

Abstract:
Decision con?dence re?ects our ability to evaluate the quality of decisions and guides sub-
sequent behavior. Experiments on con?dence reports have almost exclusively focused on
two-alternative decision-making. In this realm, the leading theory is that con?dence re?ects
the probability that a decision is correct (the posterior probability of the chosen option).
There is, however, another possibility, namely that people are less con?dent if the best two
options are closer to each other in posterior probability, regardless of how probable they are
in absolute terms. This possibility has not previously been considered because in two-
alternative decisions, it reduces to the leading theory. Here, we test this alternative theory in
a three-alternative visual categorization task. We found that con?dence reports are best
explained by the difference between the posterior probabilities of the best and the next-best
options, rather than by the posterior probability of the chosen (best) option alone, or by the
overall uncertainty (entropy) of the posterior distribution. Our results upend the leading
notion of decision con?dence and instead suggest that con?dence re?ects the observer’s
subjective probability that they made the best possible decision.

----------------------
Subtitles:



Text:
----------------------
Con?dence refers to the “sense of knowing” that comes with
a decision. Con?dence affects the planning of subsequent
actions after a decision1,2, learning3, and cooperation in
group decision making4. Failures of utilizing con?dence infor-
mation have been linked to psychiatric disorders5.
While human observers can report their self-assessment of the
quality of their decisions6–12, the computations underlying con-
?dence reports are still insuf?ciently understood. The leading
theory of con?dence suggested that con?dence re?ects the
probability that a decision is correct7,8,13–17. We refer to this idea
as the “Bayesian con?dence hypothesis”, meaning that the
decision-makers use the posterior probability of the chosen
category (i.e. the subjective probability that decision is correct) for
their con?dence reports. Accordingly, in neurophysiological stu-
dies, a brain region or a neural process is considered to represent
con?dence if its responses correlate with the probability that a
decision is correct18–20. Behavioral studies testing whether human
con?dence reports follow Bayesian con?dence hypothesis have
shown mixed results: While some studies found resemblances
between Bayesian con?dence and empirical data18,19,21,22, others
have suggested that con?dence reports deviate from the Bayesian
con?dence hypothesis23–25.
Even though the Bayesian con?dence hypothesis is the leading
theory of con?dence, there is currently no evidence to rule out the
possibility that con?dence is affected by the probability of correct
of the unchosen options. Speci?cally, people could be less con-
?dent if the next-best option is very close to the best option. In
other words, con?dence could depend on the difference between
the posterior probabilities of the best and the next-best options,
rather than on the absolute value of the posterior of the best
option. The reason that this idea has not been tested before might
be that previous studies of decision con?dence predominantly
used two-alternative decision tasks; in such tasks, the alternative
hypothesis is equivalent to the Bayesian con?dence hypothesis,
because the difference between the two posterior probabilities in a
two-alternative task is a monotonic function of the highest pos-
terior probability. Thus, to dissociate these two models of con-
?dence, we need more than two alternatives. Here, we use a three-
alternative decision task. To preview our main result, we ?nd that
the difference-based model accounts well for the data, whereas
the model corresponding to the Bayesian con?dence hypothesis
and a third, entropy-based model do not.
To investigate the computations underlying con?dence reports
in the presence of multiple alternatives, we designed a three-
alternative categorization task. On each trial, participants viewed
a large number of exemplar dots from each of the three categories
(color-coded), along with one target dot in a different color
(Fig. 1a). Each category corresponded to an uncorrelated, iso-
tropic Gaussian distribution in the plane. We asked participants
to regard the stimulus as a bird’s eye view of three groups of
people. People within a group wear shirts of the same color, and
the target dot represents a person from one of the three groups.
Participants made two responses: the category of the target, and
their con?dence in their decision on a four-point Likert scale.
To manipulate participants’ beliefs (posterior probability dis-
tribution), we used different con?gurations of the category dis-
tributions and varied the position of the target dot within each
con?guration (Fig. 1b, c). This design allowed us to test quantitative
models of how the posterior distribution gives rise to con?dence
reports (see an illustration of this idea in Supplementary Fig. 1).
Results
Model. Generative model. Each category is equally probable. We
assume that the observer makes a noisy measurement x of the
position s of the target dot. We model the noise as obeying an
isotropic Gaussian distribution centered at the target dot.
Decision model: We now consider a Bayesian observer. We
assume that the observer knows that each category is equally
probable (p(C) = 1/3), and knows the distribution associated with
each category (group) based on the exemplar dots. Given a
measurement x, the posterior probability of category C is then
We further assume that due to decision noise or inference
noise, the observer does not maintain the exact posterior
distribution, p(C | x), but instead a noisy version of it. This type of
decision noise is consistent with the notion that a portion of
variability in behavior is due to “late noise” at the level of decision
variable26–28. We modeled decision noise by drawing a noisy
posterior distribution from a Dirichlet distribution around the
true posterior (Fig. 2a, b; See details in Methods). In our case, the
true posterior, which we denote by p, consists of the three
posterior probabilities from Eq.(1): p = (p(C = 1| x), p(C = 2| x),
p(C = 3 | x)). The magnitude of decision noise, the amount of
variation around p, is (inversely) controlled by a concentration
parameter ?>0. When ???, the variation vanishes and the
posterior is noiseless. In general, the “noisy posterior”, which we
denote as a vector q, satis?es q~Dirichlet(?p). We assume that
when reporting the category of the target, the observer chooses
the category C with the highest q(C |x). Unless otherwise
speci?ed, we will from now on refer to the noisy posterior
distribution as simply the posterior distribution.
We introduce three models of con?dence reports: the Max
model, the Entropy model and the Difference model. Each of
these models contains two steps: (a) mapping the posterior
distribution (q) to a real-valued internal con?dence variable; (b)
applying three criteria to this con?dence variable to divide its
space into four regions, which, when ordered, map to the four
con?dence ratings. The second step accounts for every possible
monotonic mapping from the internal con?dence variable to the
four-point con?dence rating. The three models differ only in the
?rst step.
The Max model corresponds to the Bayesian con?dence
hypothesis. In this model, the con?dence variable is the probability
that the chosen category is correct, or in other words, it is the
highest of the three posterior probabilities (Fig. 2c). In this model,
the observer is least con?dent when the posterior distribution is
uniform. Importantly, after the posterior distribution is computed,
the posterior probability of the unchosen options does not further
contribute to the computation of con?dence.
In the Difference model, the con?dence variable is the
difference between the highest and second-highest posterior
probabilities. In this model, con?dence is low if the evidence for
the next-best option is strong, and the observer is least con?dent
whenever the two most probable categories are equally probable.
One interpretation of this model is that con?dence re?ects the
observer’s subjective probability that they made the best possible
choice, regardless of the actual posterior probability of that
choice. An alternative interpretation is that decision-making
consists of an iterative process in which the observer reduces a
multiple-alternative task to simpler (two-alternative) tasks (see
the Discussion section). (Note that a model that uses the
difference of the probability of the best option and the average of
the non-chosen options is equivalent to the Max model.)
In the Entropy model, the con?dence variable is the negative of
the uncertainty conveyed by the entire posterior distribution, as
quanti?ed by its negative entropy. High con?dence is associated
with low entropy, and vice versa. Like in the Max model, the
observer is least con?dent when the posterior distribution is
uniform. Unlike in the Max model, however, the posterior
probabilities of the non-chosen categories directly affect con-
?dence. For the details of the models, see Methods.
All three models are Bayesian in the sense that they compute
the posterior probability distribution and categorize the target dot
into the category with the highest posterior. Thus, in all three
models, the unchosen options “implicitly” affect con?dence by
contributing to the denominator in the computation of the
posterior probabilities. In the Discussion, we discuss a model in
which the unchosen option (e.g., the least probable category) is
disregarded before even contributing to the normalization of the
posterior. The three models differ in how the con?dence variable
is read out from the posterior distribution. The Max model is
unique in assuming that after the computation of the posterior
probabilities, the unchosen categories do not further affect the
computation of con?dence.
In our three-alternative task, these models generate qualita-
tively different mappings from the posterior distribution to the
con?dence variable (Fig. 2c). In a standard two-alternative task,
however, the models would have been indistinguishable, because
the probability of the chosen category would have determined the
probability of the non-chosen category.
The Max, Difference and Entropy models are our three main
models. So far, the sources of variability in these models are
sensory noise (Sen) and Dirichlet decision noise (Dir). We name
the corresponding models Max-Sen-Dir, Diff-Sen-Dir, Ent-Sen-
Dir models in the supplementary ?gures and supplementary
tables in order to distinguish them from model variants that
consider different sources of variability (introduced later).
We ?tted the free parameters to the data of each individual
subject using maximum-likelihood estimation, where the data on
a given trial consist of a decision-con?dence pair. Thus, we
accounted for the joint distribution of decisions and con?dence
ratings24,25,29 (see Methods). We compared models using the
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC30). A model recovery analysis
suggests that if the true model is among our tested models, our
model comparison procedure is able to identify the correct model
(see Methods and Supplementary Fig. 3).
Experiment 1. In Experiment 1, the centers of the three category
distributions were aligned vertically (Fig. 1b). There were four
conditions: In the ?rst two conditions, the centers were evenly
spaced horizontally. In the last two conditions, the center of the
central distribution was closer to the center of either the left or
the right distribution. The vertical position of the target dot was
sampled from a normal distribution, and the horizontal position
of the target dot was sampled uniformly between the center of the
leftmost and right-most classes plus an extension to the left and
the right (see Methods).
We plotted the psychometric curves (mean con?dence report
as a function of the horizontal position of the target dot) by
averaging con?dence reports across trials using a sliding window
(Fig. 3). Mean con?dence report varied as a function of the
horizontal position of the target. In the ?rst two conditions
(Fig. 3), where the three distributions were evenly spaced, the
psychometric curves showed two dips, with the lowest con?dence
attained at two positions symmetric around 0°.
We simulated the predicted psychometric curves using the
best-?tting parameters of each model (Fig. 3b). The ?ts of the
Max and the Difference models resembled the data, but the best
?t of the Entropy model showed a dip at the center in the ?rst
condition.
In the third and fourth conditions, in which the three
distributions were unevenly spaced, mean con?dence was lowest
around the centers of the two distributions that were closest to
each other. Only the Difference model exhibited this pattern,
while the Max and the Entropy models deviated more clearly
from the data.
The models not only make predictions for con?dence reports,
but also for the category decisions (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Participants categorized the target dot based on its location, and
when the target dot was close to the boundary between two
neighboring categories (the location where two categories have
equal likelihood), they assigned the target to those two
neighboring categories with nearly equal probabilities. In general,
this pattern is consistent with an observer who chooses the
category associated with the highest posterior probability. The
Entropy model ?ts worst, even though all three models used the
same rule for the category decision; this is because the con?dence
data also need to be accounted for. The Difference model
outperformed the Max model by a group-summed AIC score of
391 (95% CI [222, 569]) and the Entropy model by 1937 (95% CI
[1363, 2562]) (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 1).
We further tested reduced versions of each of the three
con?dence models by removing either the sensory noise or the
decision noise from the model. The Difference model out-
performed the Max model and the Entropy model regardless of
these manipulations (Supplementary Fig. 4A and Supplementary
Table 1). The sensory noise played a minor role in this task
compared to the decision noise. For example, removing the
sensory noise from the Difference model increased the AIC by
121 (95% CI [48, 199]), while removing the inference noise
increased the AIC by 737 (95% CI [590, 914]). Using the Bayesian
information criterion (BIC)31 for model comparison led to the
same conclusions (Supplementary Fig. 5A and Supplementary
Table 2).
So far, we jointly ?tted the category decision and con?dence
reports. One could wonder whether independently ?tting the
con?dence reports would lead to different results. We found
the same results when only ?tting the con?dence reports: The
Difference model outperformed the other two models, and the
decision noise had a stronger in?uence on the model ?t
(Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7). Because the Max, the Difference
and the Entropy used the same rule for category decisions, we
compared category decision models that used the same decision
rule (reporting the category with the highest posterior prob-
ability), but included sensory noise only, decision noise only, or
both. We ?tted the category decisions alone and found that the
models including the decision noise ?t the data better than the
model with the sensory noise alone (Supplementary Figs. 8
and 9). This is similar to the results obtained by ?tting the
con?dence reports alone or by jointly ?tting both category
decisions and con?dence reports.
We tested various alternative models (see details in Supple-
mentary Information). We found that the Difference model
outperformed the Max and the Entropy models when we replaced
Dirichlet decision noise by drawing samples from the true
posterior, or when we added noise in the measurement of the
category means (Supplementary Fig. 10A). In addition, we tested
heuristic models that made category decisions and con?dence
reports based on the category means and the noisy measurement
of the target location (x) but did not compute posterior
probabilities. Still, the heuristic models did not ?t the data better
than the Difference model (Supplementary Fig. 10A).
Experiment 2. In Experiment 2, we aimed to test whether the
?ndings in Experiment 1 could be generalized to other stimulus
con?gurations, where the centers of the categories varied in a
two-dimensional space. We tested four conditions in which the
centers of the three groups varied along both horizontal and
vertical axis (Fig. 1c). We sampled the target dot positions uni-
formly within a circular area centered on the screen. In addition,
the distribution of the categories used in Experiment 2 allowed
us to probe con?dence reports in a wider range of posterior
distributions (Supplementary Fig. 1B). For example, we can
probe the con?dence report when the target dot had the same
distance to all three categories in Experiment 2, but not in
Experiment 1.
The “psychometric curve” is now a heat map in two dimensions
(Fig. 5). The ?ts to these psychometric curves showed different
patterns among the three models: When the three groups formed
an equilateral triangle (Fig. 5, the ?rst and second columns), the
con?dence (as a function of target location) estimated by the
Entropy model exhibited contours that were more convex than
that in the data. In the last two conditions (Fig. 5, the third and
fourth columns), compared to the other two models, the
Difference model showed stronger resemblance to the data, as
the model exhibited an extended low con?dence region at the side
where two categories were positioned closely. The results of
model comparisons were consistent with Experiment 1. The
Difference model outperformed the Max model by a group-
summed AIC score of 541 (95% CI [371, 735]) and the Entropy
model by 1631 (95% CI [1179, 2159]) (Fig. 4b). The model with
both sensory and inference noise explained the data the best, and
the inference noise had a stronger in?uence on the model ?t than
the sensory noise (Supplementary Fig. 4B, Supplementary Fig. 5B,
Supplementary Tables 1 and 2).
Consistent with Experiment 1, we found that the Difference
model outperformed the Max and the Entropy model when we
only ?tted the con?dence reports (Supplementary Fig. 6B).
Models that considered other sources of variability or used
heuristic decision rules did not perform better than the Difference
model (Supplementary Fig. 10B).
Experiment 3. So far, we found that the Difference model ?ts the
data better than the Max model and the Entropy model. However,
whether participants report the probability that a decision is
correct (the Max model) might depend on the experimental
design. In Experiment 1 and 2, participants received no feedback
on their category decision. Thus, the probability of being correct
in the task could be dif?cult to learn. To investigate this issue, in
Experiment 3, using the same four stimulus con?gurations as
those in Experiment 1 (Fig. 1b), we randomly chose one of the
three groups as the true target category in each trial, and sampled
the target position from the distribution of the true category.
Feedback was presented at the end of each trial, informing par-
ticipants of the true category.
The results of model comparison were consistent with
Experiment 1 and 2. The Difference model outperformed the
Max model by a group-summed AIC score of 100 (95% CI [46,
156]) and the Entropy model by 1113 (95% CI [817, 1447])
(Supplementary Fig. 11, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). The
model with both sensory and inference noise explained the data
the best, and the inference noise had a stronger in?uence on the
model ?t than the sensory noise (Supplementary Figs. 4C and 5C).
These results held when we ?tted the con?dence reports alone, or
when other sources of variability were considered (Supplementary
Figs. 6C and 10C). Heuristic models did not ?t the data better
than the Difference model (Supplementary Fig. 10C).
Discussion
To distinguish the leading model of perceptual con?dence
(the Bayesian con?dence hypothesis) from a new alternative
model in which con?dence is affected by the posterior prob-
abilities of unchosen options, we studied human con?dence
reports in a three-alternative perceptual decision task. We found
that con?dence is best described by the Difference model, in
which con?dence re?ects the difference between the strength of
observers’ belief (posterior probability) of the top two options
in a decision. The Max model (which corresponds to the
Bayesian con?dence hypothesis) and the Entropy model (in
which con?dence is derived from the entropy of the posterior
distribution) fell short in accounting for the data. Our results
were robust under changes of stimulus con?gurations (Experi-
ment 1 and 2), and when trial-by-trial feedback was provided
(Experiment 3). Our results demonstrate that the posterior
probabilities of the unchosen categories impact con?dence in
decision-making.
Decision tasks with multiple alternatives not only allow us to
dissociate different computational models of con?dence, they
are also ecologically important. In the real world, human and
other animals often face decisions with multiple alternatives,
such as identifying the color of a traf?c light, recognizing a
person, categorizing a species of an animal, or making a medical
diagnosis.
Our models can be generalized to categorical choice with more
than three alternatives. Speci?cally, the Difference model predicts
that besides the posterior probabilities of the top two options, the
posterior of the other options does not matter as long as they add
up to the same total. A special type of categorical choice is when
the world state variable is continuous (e.g., in an orientation
estimation task) but gets discretized for the purpose of the
experiment. Consider the speci?c case that the posterior dis-
tribution is Gaussian. An observer following the Difference model
would compute the difference between the posteriors of the two
discrete options closest to the peak. This serves as a coarse
approximation to the curvature of the posterior distribution at its
peak, which, for Gaussians, is monotonically related to its inverse
variance, consistent with an earlier model by van den Berg et al.29,
in which con?dence is based on the precision parameter of the
posterior in continuous estimation tasks29. Outside the realm of
Gaussian and similar distributions, the Difference model and van
den Berg et al.29’s model might be distinguishable. For example,
when the posterior distribution is bimodal, with the modes
slightly different in height, the variance of the posterior is
dominated by the separation between the modes, whereas the
Difference model will use the difference in height for con?dence
reports.
Although many behavioral studies have emphasized simila-
rities between human con?dence reports and predictions of
Bayesian models e.g18,21,22., the Bayesian con?dence hypothesis
has been questioned before8,13–16. In addition to the probability
of being correct, con?dence is in?uenced by various factors such
as reaction time32, post-decision processing33–36, and the mag-
nitude of positive evidence37–40. Two model comparison studies
have shown deviations from Bayesian con?dence hypothesis in
two-alternative decision tasks24,25. However, in one study24, the
experimental design did not allow the authors to strongly dis-
tinguish the model that was based on Bayesian con?dence
hypothesis from those that were not. Moreover, in both
studies24,25, the alternative models were based on heuristic deci-
sion rules without a broader theoretical interpretation. Here, we
have identi?ed a type of deviation from the Bayesian con?dence
hypothesis that is not only of a qualitatively different nature, but
that also raises new theoretical questions.
Speci?cally, the Difference model is currently a descriptive
model. We have two suggestions to interpret it as an outcome of
approximate inference. First, the Difference model might be an
approximation to a model in which con?dence depends on the
probability that an observer made the best possible decision.
In this view, the observer possesses metacognitive knowledge that
their decision is based on the noisy posterior q rather than
the true posterior p, and consequently, realizes that it is possible
that the chosen category is not the category with the highest true
posterior probability. Con?dence would then be derived from the
probability that the chosen category has the highest true posterior
probability. The stronger the evidence for the next-best option,
the less likely is the case, which would lead to lower con?dence.
This interpretation is consistent with recent work that showed
that subjective con?dence guides information seeking during
decision-making41. Under the Difference model, during infor-
mation seeking, the observer’s goal is to make sure that the best
option is better than the alternative options. Low con?dence
would encourage the observer to collect more information in
order to strengthen the belief that the best option is better than
the next-best option.
Second, the ?nding that con?dence is best described by the
relative strength of the evidence of the top two options might be
related to other ?ndings in multiple-alternative decision-making.
In one experiment, the observer watched columns of bricks build
up on the screen, and reported which column had the highest
accumulation rate42. A heuristic model in which the observer
makes a decision when the height of the tallest column exceeds
the height of the next-tallest column by a ?xed threshold captured
the overall pattern of people’s behavior. In a study on self-
directed learning in a three-alternative categorization task,
observers had to learn the category distributions by sampling
from the feature space and receiving feedback. Instead of
choosing the most informative samples, human observers chose
ones for which the likelihood of two categories were similar,
namely those located at boundaries between pairs of two cate-
gories43. This literature allows us to speculate that observers
might decompose a multiple-alternative decision into several
simpler (perhaps two-alternative) decisions. This notion is
reminiscent of the concept in prospect theory that before a phase
of evaluation, extremely unlikely outcomes might be ?rst dis-
carded in an “editing” phase44. Hence, an alternative interpreta-
tion of our results is that con?dence reports deviate from the
Bayesian con?dence hypothesis (the Max model) because the
observer estimates the probability of correct in a way that ignores
the options that are discarded before ?nal evaluation. In the
Difference model, the least favorite option is not completely
discarded because it decreases the posterior probabilities of the
other two options (and thus their difference) by contributing to
the normalization pool45,46. Therefore, we consider an extreme
version of editing, the Ratio model, in which the least-favorite
option does not even participate in normalization, and thus
con?dence solely depends on the likelihood ratio between the top
two options. The Difference model and the Ratio model are not
distinguishable in Experiment 1 and 2 (Supplementary Fig. 12).
In Experiment 3, the Difference model has a slight advantage over
the Ratio model by a group-summed AIC of 51 (95% CI [18, 90]).
Testing variable numbers of categories within an experiment
might help to differentiate between these two models.
We found that compared to the sensory noise, the noise
associated with the computation of posterior probability plays a
more important role in our task. This is consistent with the
?ndings of a recent study26. The relative unimportance of sensory
noise could be partly due to our experimental design, which used
stimuli with strong signal strength (saturated color and unlimited
duration). Differently from our study, Drugowitsch et al.26 used
an evidence accumulation task and further distinguished two
types of decision noise: inference noise that was added with each
new stimulus sample, and selection noise that was injected only
once, right before the ?nal response. Because our experiment only
had one stimulus in each trial, it was not set up to distinguish
these two sources of variability. While modeling decision noise
using Dirichlet distribution was successful, we found that models
in which the category mean is not known exactly but measured in
a noisy fashion also ?t the data in two experiments quite well
(Diff-Sen-Mean model in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2; Sup-
plementary Fig. 10). This is consistent with a recent ?nding that
imperfect knowledge about the experimental parameters
explained a signi?cant portion of the behavioral variability in
two-alternative decision tasks47.
Across the three experiments, we did not ?nd evidence that any
of the heuristic models we tested outperformed the Difference
model. In only one experiment, a heuristic model was indis-
tinguishable from the Difference model (DistW-Sen-Mean model
in Experiment 2; Supplementary Fig. 10B). These results are
different from a recent study reporting that some probabilistic but
heuristic models outperformed the Bayesian models in ?tting
con?dence data in two-alternative tasks25. The causes of this
discrepancy may lie in the experimental design. Adler and Ma
manipulated different levels of uncertainty by presenting brief
stimuli (50 ms) at various contrast levels. To perform the task
optimally, observers had to track the sensory uncertainty varied
in a range (e.g., from 0.4 to 13% contrast in their main experi-
ment) in a trial-by-trial fashion. Instead, we purposely reduced
uncertainty by presenting all the stimuli at the highest achievable
contrast with unlimited duration. In addition, the distributions of
the categories were not presented explicitly in Adler and Ma’s
study whereas the distributions of the categories were presented
throughout each trial in the present study. These factors may
contribute to the fact that heuristic models performed better in
Adler and Ma’s study but not in our experiments.
The ?AIC (relative to the Difference model) was smaller in
Experiment 3 than in Experiment 1 and 2. Intuitively, this is not
surprising, since when directly sampling from the stimulus dis-
tributions in Experiment 3, there were more target dots posi-
tioned at the far left and far right, compared to the target dots in
Experiment 1 and 2. These trials would not have been informative
to distinguish the models. All three models have the same pre-
diction (high con?dence) for far-left and the far-right locations,
and this may lead to a smaller ?AIC. To examine whether sti-
mulus selection alone could account for the smaller AIC differ-
ences, we performed a model recovery analysis. We synthesized
data based on the observers’ best-?tted parameters of the Max,
Difference and Entropy models, and we ?tted the synthesized
data with these three models. We found that the performance of
the Max and the Difference models are closer in Experiment 3
than in Experiment 1 and 2, similar to the real data (Supple-
mentary Fig. 3). Thus, stimulus selection alone can account for
the smaller AIC differences.
Whereas we propose a theoretical framework for how decisions
and con?dence reports are computed in multi-alternative tasks,
we are agnostic about how the decision-making process unfolds
over time. Other models exist that consider the temporal
dynamics of decision-making. In particular, drift-diffusion
models and race models jointly account for accuracy and reac-
tion times in many tasks48. Some studies have employed such
accumulation models to account for con?dence judgments34,49–52.
However, these studies only considered con?dence judgments in
two-alternative decision tasks. Conceptually, our ?ndings might
be related to the “balance of evidence” (BoE) in Vickers and
colleagues’ work51,53. In a race model with two accumulators,
they suggested that con?dence is computed as the difference
between the accumulated evidence of the two accumulators51.
Vickers and Lee suggested that in theory, this idea could be
extended to three-alternative tasks, but they speculated that
con?dence in the chosen category (option A) might be computed
as the average of the con?dence in comparing option A to option
B and the con?dence in comparing option A to option C53. This
algorithm is more similar to the Max model than to the Differ-
ence model here: Assuming that A, B and C represent the evi-
dence accumulated for each of the three categories, and A is the
chosen category, con?dence is computed as c*=((A?B)+ (A-
?C))/2 = (3A?1)/2. Then, con?dence only depends on the
chosen category A. It remains to be seen whether evidence
accumulation models designed to explain decisions in multiple-
alternative tasks (review in refs. 57,58) could be extended to
generate con?dence reports that are consistent with our data and
with the Difference model.
Do our results generalize beyond perceptual decision-making?
In a two-alternative value-based decision task, observers reported
con?dence in a way that was similar to that in perceptual decision
tasks:10 When observers were asked to choose the good with the
higher value, con?dence increased with the posterior probability
that a decision is correct, which in turn increased with the dif-
ference in value between the two goods. In addition, choice
accuracy was higher in high-con?dence trials then in low-
con?dence trials, re?ecting observers’ ability to evaluate their own
performance. A recent study also reported that observers are able
to re?ect on their decisions and report con?dence in three-
alternative value-based decision tasks54. Given that the compu-
tation of subjective value may involve a Bayesian inference
process similar to that in perception12, it might be worth inves-
tigating whether con?dence reports in multiple-alternative
value-based decisions also deviate from the Bayesian con?dence
hypothesis. The Difference model would predict that, con?dence
is determined by the difference between the probability that
the chosen item is the most valuable and the probability that the
next-best item is the most valuable.
How does the present study advance our understanding of the
neural basis of con?dence? Most neurophysiological studies of
con?dence have considered the neural activity that correlates with
the probability of being correct as the neural representation of
con?dence (but see ref. 55). Neural responses in parietal cortex19,
orbitofrontal cortex18 and pulvinar20 have been associated with
that representation of con?dence. These studies all used two-
alternative decision tasks. Multiple-alternative decision tasks have
been used in neurophysiological studies on non-human primates
but not with the objective of studying con?dence46,56–58. By
utilizing multiple-alternative tasks, neural studies could dissociate
the neural correlates of probability correct from that of the
“difference” con?dence variable in the Difference model, which
according to our results, might be the basis of human subjective
con?dence. A potentially important difference between human
and non-human animal studies is that in the latter, con?dence is
not explicitly reported but operationalized through some aspect
of behavior, such as the probability of choosing a “safe” (opt-out)
option19,20,55,59,60, or the time spent on waiting for reward18.
Thus, one should be careful when directly comparing these
implicit reports with explicit con?dence reports in human studies.
Methods
Data availability
Code availability
Received: 20 March 2019; Accepted: 12 March 2020;
Data availability
Code availability
Received: 20 March 2019; Accepted: 12 March 2020;
Acknowledgements
Author contributions
Competing interests
Additional information
