Title:
An ultrasensitive photoelectrochemical platform
for quantifying photoinduced electron-transfer
properties of a single entity

Abstract:
Understanding the photoinduced electron-transfer process is of paramount importance for realizing ef?cient solar energy
conversion. It is rather dif?cult to clarify the link between the speci?c properties and the photoelectrochemical
performance of an individual component in an ensemble system because data are usually presented as averages because
of interplay of the heterogeneity of the bulk system. Here, we report a step-by-step protocol to fabricate an ultrasensitive
photoelectrochemical platform for real-time detection of the intrinsic photoelectrochemical behaviors of a single entity
with picoampere and sub-millisecond sensitivity. Using a micron-thickness nanoparticulate TiO2-?lmed Au ultramicro-
electrode (UME) as the electron-transport electrode, photocurrent transients can be observed for each individual
dye-tagged oxide semiconductor nanoparticle collision associated with a single-entity photoelectrochemical reaction. This
protocol allows researchers to obtain high-resolution photocurrent signals to quantify the photoinduced electron-transfer
properties of an individual entity, as well as to precisely process the data obtained. We also include procedures for
dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging and collision
frequency–concentration correlation to con?rm that the photoelectrochemical collision events occur at an unambiguously
single-entity level. The time required for the entire protocol is ~36 h, with a single-entity photoelectrochemical
measurement taking <1 h to complete for each independent experiment. This protocol requires basic nanoelectrochemistry
and nanotechnology skills, as well as an intermediate-level understanding of photoelectrochemistry.

----------------------
Subtitles:

 Software
 Ferrocene solution
 DMSO–water solution
 DMSO–methanol solution
 Piranha solution
 Electrochemical cell
 Photoelectrochemical cell
 (A) Photoelectrochemical measurement of a single N719@TiO2 entity for dye-sensitized solar
cell system
 (A) DLS determination of size (hydrodynamic diameter) distribution of a single-collision
event ? Timing ~30 min


Text:
----------------------
Photoelectrochemical reactions have gained much attention among researchers over the past decades,
mainly because of their powerful utility in solar energy conversion1–3. Photoinduced electron transfer
is an essential step in the conversion of light into electric power in photoelectrochemistry4,5, also
frequently called photo-driven electrochemical reactions by chemists6,7. Among the most ef?cient
photoelectrochemical reactions are those involving light absorption by wide-band-gap semiconductor
nanoparticles and molecular adsorbates, which result in the occurrence of electron-transfer reactions
at the semiconductor interface that are the basis for photoelectric conversion in photovoltaic devi-
ces2,8,9. Therefore, understanding the photoinduced electron-transfer process is of paramount
importance for realizing ef?cient conversion of solar energy. A range of analytical methods can be
used to study photoelectrochemical properties, such as time-resolved photocurrent measurement,
photovoltage measurement and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy4–8. These techniques are
capable of investigating the physicochemical properties and photoelectric performance of different
types of photoelectrochemical processes; however, substantial enhancements of the design of highly
ef?cient photoelectrochemical devices remain a great challenge for the following reasons10,11. The
inability to quantify the structure–activity relationship because of the interplay of structural and
functional heterogeneity among individual entities is a major barrier12,13. The intrinsic properties
are masked in traditional photoelectrochemical measurements, producing averaged data caused by
measurement of large ensembles of molecules or billions of nanoparticles. This could result in
overlooking a subpopulation minority species with outstanding activities14–17. In addition, the sur-
rounding medium and assembly process are important factors that affect conversion ef?ciencies.
Therefore, thorough insights into the photoelectrochemical performance of a single entity would
allow the roles of nanoparticles and dye molecules to be quanti?ed, uncovering the intrinsic prop-
erties of photoinduced transfer under realistic reaction conditions.
In contrast to studies on a bulk system, single-entity electrochemistry has emerged as a unique tool
for exploring the structural and kinetic features of individual entities during stochastic collision
measurements at a UME surface, avoiding any inhomogeneous averaging and broadening effects18–20.
Many examples of single-entity collision experiments have been reported in this ?eld, such as elec-
trocatalysis21–23, blocking24,25 and electrochemical stripping26–29. For example, the electrocatalytic
behavior of individual entities has been studied as they collide on a relatively inert UME, resulting in
current transients due to the catalytic ampli?cation–mediated electron-transfer process19–23. Quan-
titative information about individual nanoparticles, such as size, morphology and concentration, can
be obtained by measuring the faradic charge associated with the electrochemically destructive process
of direct oxidation of each colliding nanoparticle26,27. Recently, this technique has also been utilized
to investigate the electron-transfer dynamics of individual nanoparticles at the UME interface30–33.
Therefore, stochastic collision electrochemical measurements offer direct electron-transfer informa-
tion at interfaces and provide valuable evidence in studying the intrinsic electrochemical activities of
an individual entity18–30. In addition, they also have advantages that include rapid and sensitive
measurement, low cost, lack of requirement for labeling, high throughput and low sample con-
sumption31–35. If we could use single-entity electrochemistry to study the photoelectrochemical
reaction, we could solve the ensemble problem described above. However, the key bottleneck in
applying single-entity electrochemistry to photoelectrochemical measurement is the need for real-
time recording of the ultrafast photoinduced electron-transfer data36. That is, the electron-transfer
process of a photoelectrochemical reaction occurs on a sub-picosecond timescale and cannot be
electrochemically resolved because of the limitations of current electrochemical instruments. Current
photoinduced electron-transfer research is mainly based on ultrafast time-resolved transient spec-
troscopy techniques for tracking the intermediate states of the electron-transfer process in photo-
electrochemical reactions on picosecond and femtosecond timescales37–39.
Development and applications of the protocol
A useful strategy for achieving in situ electrochemical measurement of photoinduced electron transfer
at the single-entity level is to fabricate a micron-thickness nanoparticulate TiO2 ?lm–coated Au UME
(TiO2@Au UME) as an electron-transport electrode. At this electrode, photoinduced electrons
undergo a trap-limited diffusion process in the TiO2 ?lm, causing a substantial extension of electron
transit time. Photoinduced electrons move through the TiO2 ?lm to the Au UME electrode in a
multiple-trapping process. Upon visible light absorption by N719 dye molecules, the incident photons
are converted into electron–hole pairs, and a gradient electrical potential is frequently generated to
cause the separation of electron and hole. Photoexcited electrons are subsequently injected from the
excited state of N719 into the semiconductor conduction band of neighboring ZnO or TiO2 nano-
particles. When individual N719@TiO2 or N719@ZnO entities stochastically collide with TiO2@Au
UME, the electrons are transferred into the nanoparticulate TiO2 ?lm. The electrons then travel
through the TiO2 ?lm to reach the Au UME electrode. The photoexcitation, electron separation and
injection are usually ultrafast and take place on a picosecond timescale. Therefore, in our photo-
electrochemical measurements, the rate-determining steps are the collision of a nanoparticle with the
TiO2@Au UME and/or the electron diffusion process inside the TiO2 ?lm.
To elucidate the electron-transfer dynamics of the collision process, we studied the photoelec-
trochemical behaviors of individual dye-tagged oxide semiconductor nanoparticles colliding with a
bare Au UME. No current signal was observed under illumination in this case (Supplementary Fig. 1).
This demonstrates that the collision occurs in a very short time at bare Au electrode surfaces and is
faster than the acquisition time of a single-point electrochemical measurement. In this study, we
performed single-entity photoelectrochemical experiments using a low-noise electrochemical
instrument at a sampling rate of 100 kHz. The internal low-pass Bessel ?lter of the ampli?er was set
to 5 kHz. This means the collision process takes place in <66 ?s, as estimated by instrumental
resolution. To capture the transient signal, we needed to substantially extend the residence time of the
nanoparticle on the electrode or greatly slow the electron transfer in the TiO2@Au UME. Therefore,
we designed a micron-thickness semiconductor ?lm of nanoparticulate TiO2 and coated the surface
of an Au UME with it so that photoinjected electrons proceed with trap-limited diffusion in the TiO2
?lm. As a result, the typical duration of electron transit in TiO2 ?lm was considerably increased,
allowing the achievement of successful real-time detection of single-entity photoelectrochemical
behaviors. Owing to a trap-mediated electron diffusion process in TiO2 ?lms, we observed sub-
millisecond photocurrent transients associated with single-entity photoelectrochemical reactions.
Using this approach, we developed an ultrasensitive photoelectrochemical platform for real-time
photocurrent detection of individual dye-tagged oxide semiconductor nanoparticles with picoampere
and sub-millisecond sensitivity40,41 (Fig. 1). In particular, the high resolution and sensitivity of this
technique could enable a wide range of potential applications for single-entity photoelectrochemical
measurements, for example, in dye-sensitized solar cells, photoelectrochemical water splitting and
photocatalysis systems.
This strategy greatly enhances the possibilities of applying single-entity electrochemistry to a broad
range of photoelectrochemical measurements. Based on high-resolution photoelectrochemical mea-
surements, our platform can be used for quantifying the photoinduced electron-transfer process of a
single event, enabling electron-transfer dynamics analysis at a semiconducting TiO2 ?lm. This may
have considerable impact in the ?eld of intrinsic performance of photoelectrochemical devices. It will
certainly help to achieve an improved understanding of the electron-transfer process at the semi-
conductor interface, where the photoelectrochemical reaction processes take place.
Limitations and alternative methods
The approach described here also has some other limitations. (i) Nanoparticle suspensions should
consistently remain monodispersed during the entire photoelectrochemical measurement, which can
be achieved by controlling the concentrations of nanoparticle suspensions and the electrolyte solution
at the (approximately) picomolar and millimolar levels, respectively. (ii) The applied potential should
remain in the range from +800 to ?600 mV versus Ag/AgCl to prevent any damage to the TiO2 ?lm
on the Au UME. (iii) Incident light intensity should be <200 mW. Higher light intensity causes an
increase in current background noise due to local thermal drift.
In this protocol, we describe step-by-step procedures for the fabrication of TiO2@Au UMEs, the
preparation of monodispersed dye-tagged oxide semiconductor nanoparticle suspensions and the
subsequent procedures to monitor the photoelectrochemical behaviors of individual entities in real
time, process data and con?rm single-nanoparticle events. As a model system, we use the N719 dye
molecules27 and TiO2/ZnO semiconductor nanoparticles5 as the photosensitizers and charge trans-
port carriers, respectively. As demonstrated, this platform offers picoampere and sub-millisecond
sensitivity in terms of the current magnitude and duration of individual collision events at a
TiO2@Au UME interface, allowing the quantitative measurement of the photoinduced electron-
transfer processes of a single entity. We strongly believe this protocol could pave the way for the
fabrication of high-performance photoelectrochemical devices by quantifying the contributions of
individual components with single-entity photoelectrochemical measurements.
Reagents
? Di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2, 2?-bipyridyl-4, 4?-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II)
(N719; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 703214)
? Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (99.7% (wt/wt), <25-nm particle size; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 637254)
? Acetonitrile (?99.9% (wt/wt), CH3CN; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 34851)
? Lithium iodide (99.9% (wt/wt), LiI; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 518018)
? Iodine (?99.99% (wt/wt), I2; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 326143)
? Lithium perchlorate (99.99% (wt/wt), LiClO4; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 634565)
? Methanol (?99.9% (wt/wt), CH3OH; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 34860) !CAUTION Methanol is
?ammable and toxic and should be handled in a fume hood.
? Ethanol (95% (wt/wt), CH3CH2OH; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. E714-8)
? Titanium(IV) chloride solution 1.0 M in methylene chloride (TiCl4; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 249866)
! CAUTION TiCl4 is toxic and corrosive. Use gloves, goggles and other chemical-use safety measures
that are recommended by the appropriate concerned agencies.
? Acetone (?99.8% (wt/wt), CH3COCH3; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 34850) ! CAUTION Acetone is acutely
toxic and it is an unstable explosive. Avoid ?ames and handle it under a fume hood. Dispose of acetone
in accordance with relevant local regulations.
can cause serious damage to the eyes.
? Dimethyl sulfoxide (?99.7% (wt/wt), DMSO; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 34869)
? Ferrocene (98% (wt/wt); Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. F408)
? Tetrabutylammonium hexa?uorophosphate (?99.0% (wt/wt), TEAPF6; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 86879)
? Tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (98% (wt/wt), TBAP; Alfa Aesar, cat. no. C42014)
? Chloroform (CHCl3; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. C2432) !CAUTION CHCl3 is ?ammable and toxic, and
should be handled in a fume hood.
? Dichloromethane (CH2Cl2; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. D65100) !CAUTION CH2Cl2 is a possible
carcinogen and is toxic upon inhalation; it causes irritation and burning pain upon prolonged contact.
? Water (Milli-Q, 18.2 M?·cm at 25 °C)
? High-purity nitrogen (99.998% (wt/wt), N2; Cryogenic Gases, cat. no. UN1066) !CAUTION High-
purity nitrogen poses an asphyxiation risk. It should be handled in a well-ventilated space.
? High-purity argon (99.998% (wt/wt); Ar; Cryogenic Gases, cat. no. UN1006)
? TiO2 paste (18NR-T; hereafter referred to as ‘paste A’; Greatcell Solar, cat. no. 0002010)
? TiO2 paste (18NR-AO; hereafter referred to as ‘paste B’, mixture with 28.6% (wt/wt) 400-nm TiO2,
2.9% (wt/wt) 10-nm TiO2 and 7.2% (wt/wt) ethyl cellulose; Greatcell Solar, cat. no. 002270)
? Zinc acetate (99.99% (wt/wt), Zn(OAc)2·2H2O; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 383317)
? 5-Bromovaleric acid (97% (wt/wt), (BrCH2(CH2)2CH2COOH; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 158410)
? Dimethylformamide (DMF; Alfa Aesar, cat. no. D131-1)
? Potassium hydroxide (KOH; Aladdin, cat. no. P112281) !CAUTION KOH causes skin corrosion and
? Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 323381) !CAUTION H2O2 can be corrosive and can
cause burns; wear personal protective equipment and work in a fume hood when handling it.
? Sulfuric acid (H2SO4; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 339741) !CAUTION H2SO4 is extremely corrosive and
can cause serious burns; wear personal protective equipment and work in a fume hood when
handling it.
? Hydrochloric acid solution (HCl; Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. 30721) ! CAUTION HCl solution is corrosive
and can cause serious burns; wear personal protective equipment and work in a fume hood when
handling it.
Equipment
? Platinum wire counter electrode (CH Instruments, part no. CHI115)
? Ag/AgCl reference electrode (CH Instruments, part no. CHI111)
? Cell stand with a 25 mm × 40-mm glass cell (CH Instruments, part no. CHI220)
? Gold (Au) wires (10-?m diameter, 99.99% (wt/wt); Goodfellow, cat. no. AU005110)
? Au foil electrode (99.99% (wt/wt); Goodfellow, cat. no. AU000348)
? Abrasive discs (3.0, 1.0 and 0.3 ?m; Buehler, cat. nos. 693102, 693103 and 693104)
? 3M diamond lapping ?lms (3.0, 1.0 and 0.5 ?m; TED Pella, cat. nos. 816-326, 816-328 and 816-330)
? Carbon double-sided tape (8 mm × 20 m, Nisshin EM, cat. no. 7311)
? Copper double-sided tape (8 mm × 20 m, Nisshin EM, cat. no. 733)
? Grinding stone (2-cm radius; Electron Microscopy China, cat. no. DZ16328)
? Alumina N, Super 1 (MP Biomedicals, cat. no. 0204580)
? Borosilicate glass capillary (Sutter Instrument, cat. no. B200-116-10)
? Fluorine-doped tin oxide–coated glass slides (FTO; Hartford Glass, model no. TEC 7)
? Silver (Ag) wires (1.0-mm diameter, 99.999% (wt/wt); Alfa Aesar, cat. no. 11466)
? Hydrophobic polytetra?uoroethylene (PTFE) membrane ?lter (0.22 ?m; RephiLe Bioscience,
cat. no. RJF1322NH)
? Micropipette puller (NARISHIGE, model no. PC-10)
? Xenon lamp (500 W; Ocean Optic, model no. XBO 500W/H OFR)
? Si detector (Newport, model no. 71640)
? Vortex mixer (Vision Scienti?c, model no. BV1000)
? Axygen pipette tips (Axygen Scienti?c, cat. no. T-200-Y)
? Axygen microcentrifuge tubes (Axygen Scienti?c, cat. no. MCT-500-C)
? Eppendorf Reference 2 pipettes (single-channel adjustable-volume pipettes; Eppendorf, cat. no.
492000904)
? Ultrasonic cleaner (Shanghai Ultrasonic Instrument, model no. KUDOS SK3200)
? Analytical balance (Mettler Toledo, cat. no. ME104E)
? Millipore Milli Q A10 water puri?cation system (MilliporeSigma, model no. SIMS00000)
? Ampli?er (Molecular Devices, model no. Axopatch 200B)
? Low-noise data acquisition system (Molecular Devices, model no. DigiData 1550A)
? Faraday cage (constructed in-house: 50 × 50 × 50 cm; Thorlabs, cat. no. PSY406 (for copper mesh); see
https://backyardbrains.com/experiments/faraday for instructions for making a similar Faraday cage)
? Electrochemical workstation (CH Instruments, model no. CHI660E)
? Vibration isolation table (Shanghai/Taicang Tianhe Electromechanical, cat. no. HAP-100)
? Vinyl electrical tape (Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, cat. no. 471)
? Aluminum foil (Sangon Biotech, cat. no. F504332)
? Centrifuge (model no. 5430 with rotor FA-45-30-11, including rotor lid; Eppendorf, cat. no.
5427000291)
? Headstage holder system (AS ONE, cat. no. 6-776-03)
? Electric welding machine (Yida Electronic, model no. A-BF936)
? Copper wire (1-mm diameter, 99.9% (wt/wt); Alfa Aesar, cat. no. 010782)
? Fully automatic AC voltage regulator (Chint Electric, model no. TND1(SVC)-5)
? Paintbrush (sable, size 05; Jiangxi Province Mo Pass Culture Development, cat. no. H985)
? Tube furnace (Hefei Ke Jing Materials Technology, model no. OTF-1200X-S)
? Drying oven (Shanghai Yiheng Instruments, model no. DHG-9070(A))
? Optical long-pass ?lters (Thorlabs, model nos. FEL0400 and FEL0450)
? Optical system (constructed in-house: plano-convex lenses (K9 d = 50 mm, f = 63 mm, tc (thickness
of the center) = 14 mm, te (thickness of the edge) = 3 mm and d = 50 mm, f = 80 mm, te = 3 mm,
tc = 11.4 mm; aluminum ?lm re?ector d = 50 mm; lens and re?ector support; Fredor, see http://www.
fredorscience.com/html/product/optical/20131226/56.html for information on designing an optical
system)
? Quartz photoelectrochemical cell (constructed in-house; Wuhan Gaoss Union CnTech, see
http://www.gaossunion.com/Products_T51.html for information on making a photoelectrochemical cell)
? DLS Zetasizer Nano-ZS Instrument (Malvern Instruments, model no. ZEM4228)
? Transmission electron microscope (TEM; JEOL, model no. JEM-2100)
? Field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; Hitachi, model no. Hitachi S-4800)
? UV-visible spectrometer (Ocean Optics, model no. USB 2000+)
? Fourier-transform infrared spectrophotometer (FTIR; Thermo Fisher Scienti?c, model no.
Nicolet-6700)
? X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD; Rigaku, model no. D/MAX 2550 VB/PC)
? Glass vial (AS ONE, cat. no. 8397890)
? Alcohol burner (AS ONE, model no. 8611041)
? Resistor coil (Narishige, cat. no. PC-10)
? Vacuum pump (Sciencetool International Group, model no. T230)
? Three-way stopcock (AS ONE, cat. no. 10D5636)
? Soft rubber tube (AS ONE, cat. no. 02029878)
? Beveler (Narishige, model no. EG-401)
? Glass container (AS ONE, cat. no. 8612301)
? Disposable cuvette (Malvern, model no. DTS0012)
? Glass bottle (AS ONE, cat. no. 8399530)
? Dry cabinet (Eirmai, 38 × 27 × 28 cm, model no. MRD-28)
? Te?on tubing (Aladdin, cat. no. P2790)
? Benchtop sputter-coating system (Hitachi, model no. MC1000)
? Light chopper (Sutter Instrument, model no. LB-SC)
Software
? Custom-designed data analysis software (see Supplementary Software)
? Origin 9.0 (OriginLab: https://www.originlab.com/index.aspx?go=Support&pid=2051)
? Zetasizer software pss0012-37 version 7.11 (http://en.?ndeen.com/malvern_instruments_zetasizer_
software.html)
Reagent setup
Ferrocene solution
Ferrocene electrolyte solution is 1 mM ferrocene and 0.1 M TEAPF6 in dry acetonitrile.
DMSO–water solution
DMSO–methanol solution
Piranha solution
To make piranha solution, mix 30% (wt/wt) H2O2 and 98% (wt/wt) H2SO4 at a ratio of 3:7 (vol/vol).
Mix the solution in an open glass container when needed. !CAUTION Mixing of H2O2 and H2SO4 is
highly exothermic and can be explosive, especially if mixed with any organic solvent. Wear personal
protective equipment and work in a fume hood. !CAUTION Do not add H2SO4 to H2O2, as this will
cause intense and rapid heating of the resulting mixture, potentially splashing this strongly oxidizing
solution. ! CAUTION Excess solution should be disposed of in an appropriate manner. Piranha solution
must be left in an open container in a safe area to cool for several hours before storing for disposal. Once
cooled to room temperature, the solution can be transferred to a closed glass container for waste storage.
Equipment setup
Electrochemical cell
Photoelectrochemical cell
All single-entity photoelectrochemical measurements are performed using an Axopatch 200B ampli?er
in combination with a xenon lamp with a ?lter to cut off the wavelengths of light <450 nm under an
argon atmosphere throughout the experiment in a Faraday cage at 25 °C (Fig. 2, right). An enclosed
quartz electrochemical cell is set up on a cell holder, with two electrodes inserted into the cell: a
TiO2@Au UME and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (Fig. 2, bottom left). The TiO2@Au UME is
aligned carefully so that the light beam from the xenon lamp passes through the center of the TiO2@Au
UME. To maintain the stability of the de?ned reference potential over prolonged measurement periods
and avoid contamination-induced effects from the reference electrode55, the Ag/AgCl wire should be
placed at a distance of a few millimeters from the TiO2@Au UME electrode and used routinely in a
simpli?ed two-electrode format. Add 3 mL of electrolyte solution (I?/I3? electrolyte, DMSO–water
solution or DMSO–methanol solution) to the photoelectrochemical cell. Purge the solution by bubbling
argon for 10 min through the Te?on tubing before measurements. Considering the high photocatalytic
Use an alcohol burner to seal the tip of the micropipette for 1 s so that a conical tip is obtained.
Check the micropipette tip under a microscope and make sure that the end of the glass tip is
completely sealed.
micropipette tip.
Insert a straight 10-µm Au wire into the sealed micropipette without twisting the wire. Gently tap
the capillary to position the Au wire in the crack of the cone of the micropipette tip and check it
under the microscope.
CRITICAL STEP Wear gloves to prevent contaminating the Au wire. Keep the Au wire straight for
easier placement into the capillary.
Place the microtip vertically at the center of a heated resistor coil and then connect the micropipette
to a vacuum pump with a soft rubber tube. Turn on the vacuum pump and slowly actuate a three-
way stopcock to create a vacuum in the micropipette over 30 min.
sudden pressure change.
Turn on the micropipette puller. Slowly move the micropipette deeper into the heating coil to
ensure proper sealing as heater level gradually increases from 50% to 70% (Narishige PC-10; seal
length: 5 mm). Turn off the heater and vacuum. Let the microtip cool for 5 min. Remove the
capillary and check the micropipette under a microscope to ensure that it has been sealed with the
Au wire inside and without any air bubbles.
tip from bending and air bubbles from forming during the sealing process.
Use a beveler to polish the microtip on a diamond lapping ?lm (3.0 µm) until the Au wire is
exposed under microscopy. Polish the obtained Au UME on diamond lapping ?lms (1.0 and
0.5 µm) in sequence to obtain a smooth mirror surface. Rinse with ultrapure water and dry the Au
UME for the fabrication of TiO2 ?lm.
CRITICAL STEP Keep the Au UME perpendicular to the diamond lapping ?lms during polishing
process to obtain a ?at, smooth surface. Rinse the Au UME surface with Milli-Q water and dry with
nitrogen ?ow after each polishing cycle to remove the Au and glass granule debris attached to the
surface.
Dip a sable paintbrush (size 05) into TiO2 paste A (20 nm) and paint the paste over the surface of
the Au UME until the surface is uniformly coated. Dry the TiO2 paste in a vacuum oven at 125 °C
for 8 min. Repeat this painting and drying processes to fabricate several TiO2 paste A layers on the
Au UME. Sequentially, brush-paint the Au UME with the TiO2 paste B (400 nm) and then dry it in
a vacuum oven at 125 °C for 8 min.
CRITICAL STEP After each layer of paste A or paste B is brush-painted on the surface of the Au
UME, keep it in a clean dry cabinet for 3 min to allow the paste to relax and the surface irregularity
to reduce before drying. The thickness of the TiO2 ?lm depends on the number of layers of TiO2
paste A. Typically, ?ve layers of paste A and one layer of paste B correspond to 4- to 5-µm ?lm
thickness.
Calcine the TiO2-?lmed Au UME by heating it. Program the temperature to increase to 500 °C at a
rate of 10 °C/min and maintain the Au UME isothermally at 500 °C for 30 min. Allow the UME to
cool to room temperature naturally for 3 h.
To enhance the connectivity between the TiO2 nanoparticles, immerse the TiO2@Au UME in 5 mL
of 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min. Rinse the TiO2@Au UME with copious
amounts of ethanol and Milli-Q water, and then let it dry under a nitrogen ?ow. Repeat Step 10.
Insert a thick copper wire (1 mm in diameter) into the capillary to establish an electrical connection
with the TiO2@Au UME or UMEs for the electrochemical measurements. All procedures for the
preparation of TiO2@Au UMEs are shown in Fig. 3.
To avoid the degradation of the TiO2 ?lm while in the UV environment or humid
air atmosphere, store the fabricated TiO2@Au UMEs in a nitrogen-?lled container in the dark at
room temperature for up to 1 month.
Characterize the fabricated TiO2@Au UMEs to determine the morphology and photoconductivity
of the TiO2 ?lm with SEM results and photoelectrochemical and electrochemical measurements
(Fig. 4) as described in Box 1.
(A) Photoelectrochemical measurement of a single N719@TiO2 entity for dye-sensitized solar
cell system
(i) Add 1.8 mL of acetonitrile and 20 ?L of I?/I3? stock electrolyte solution to a
photoelectrochemical cell and bubble argon for 10 min to remove oxygen dissolved in
the solution.
(ii) Connect a TiO2@Au UME and an Ag/AgCl electrode to the headstage of the Axopatch
200B patch clamp system. Immerse the two electrodes in the electrolyte solution in the
electrochemical cell.
CRITICAL STEP Maintain the photoelectrochemical cell under an argon atmosphere
throughout the experiment.
(iii) Apply a positive potential (+600 mV versus Ag/AgCl) to the TiO2@Au UME. Record
current–time (I–t) curves in the dark and under visible light.
CRITICAL STEP The applied potential used in the acquisition of the chronoampero-
metric curves should be more positive than the photocurrent onset potential of the N719
molecule (enabling electron injection from the N719 into the TiO2 ?lm), but more negative
than its oxidation potential (Supplementary Fig. 3). In addition, the optimal external bias of
+600 mV versus Ag/AgCl at the TiO2@Au UME should be used for the collision
experiments (Supplementary Fig. 4).
(iv) Filter the N719@TiO2 suspension solution through a hydrophobic PTFE membrane ?lter
(0.22 µm) and add 200 µL of the solution to the photoelectrochemical cell to a ?nal
concentration of 174 pM.
To avoid the agglomeration of N719@TiO2 entities, further sonicate the
solution after ?ltering.
(v) Record the photoelectrochemical current responses of individual N719@TiO2 entities
under visible light. Block the light to con?rm the current transients result from the
photoinduced electron transfer of N719@TiO2 entities (Fig. 5).
Add 2 mL of DMSO containing 50 mM TBAP and 2.2 M water to a photoelectrochemical
cell and bubble argon for 10 min to remove oxygen dissolved in the solution.
Repeat Step 19A(ii–v). Note that N719@TiO2 nanoparticles and I?/I3? electrolyte solution
should be replaced with N719@ZnO nanoparticles and a DMSO–water solution,
respectively, in this photoelectrochemical measurement.
(iii) Rinse the photoelectrochemical cell using ethanol and water. Then clean the electro-
chemical cell as described in Step 16.
(iv) Investigate the photoelectrochemical behaviors of individual N719@ZnO entities as a
function of TiO2 ?lm thicknesses. TiO2@Au UMEs with different TiO2 ?lm thickness
(3.1, 4.9, 5.8, 7.5, 8.6 and 9.4 µm) are made and used in each experiment according to
Step 19B(i and ii) (Fig. 6).
Data processing using custom-designed software and OriginLab ? Timing ~1.5 h
20 Open the custom-designed data analysis software based on a second-order differential-based
calibration method, load the recorded photoelectrochemical data and set the analysis parameters,
including the start and end times, the noise level, the mean current baseline, the margin of error
and the threshold of interval time. The noise and baseline level can be visualized with the ‘trajectory
viewer’ panel.
CRITICAL STEP Set the current signal to at least triple the noise for the data analysis. The
mathematical expressions used to process data for the current signals analysis and the source code
of this custom-made data analysis software are provided in Supplementary Data 1 and 2,
(A) DLS determination of size (hydrodynamic diameter) distribution of a single-collision
event ? Timing ~30 min
(i) Power on the Zetasizer instrument 30 min before use. Turn on the computer and open the
Zetasizer software.
CRITICAL STEP The following steps describe size characterization using a Zetasizer
Nanoseries DLS instrument. For other DLS instruments, refer to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
(ii) Pipette 1.0 mL of dye-tagged semiconductor nanoparticle suspension obtained in Box 2,
before and after a photoelectrochemical experiment, into two Malvern disposable cuvettes.
Insert one cuvette into the sample compartment of the Zetasizer instrument and close
the lid.
measurements.
CRITICAL STEP The following step should be applied to both cuvettes, one after
the other.
(iii) Select a material–medium-speci?c standard operating procedure to collect DLS data. See
Supplementary Fig. 5.
(i) Deposit 10 µL of the aliquot of dye-tagged semiconductor nanoparticle suspension from
step 1A(v) or 1B(vii) of Box 2 onto a carbon-coated copper TEM grid and let it dry
naturally for 40 min.
(ii) Insert the sample into the JEOL JEM-2100F TEM specimen chamber and pump down.
(iii) Set the contrast and brightness to obtain the optimum image contrast. Find individual
entities in the sample at a low magni?cation (×15 k for the JEOL JEM-2100F TEM), spread
the electron beam to its widest, increase the magni?cation (×600 k for the JEOL JEM-
2100F TEM), and focus the electron beam slowly.
(i) Perform single-entity photoelectrochemical experiments with different concentrations
(100, 200, 280 and 372 pM) of entity solution, following Step 19 of the main Procedure.
CRITICAL STEP Sonicate the suspension solution for 5–10 min before photoelectro-
chemical measurements.
Analyze all the data ?les and count the collision frequencies of individual events at different
concentrations. Plot experimental collision frequencies as a function of the entity
concentration.
(iii) Investigate the correlation between the theoretical collision frequency (fNP) and the
nanoparticle concentration (CNP) given by fNP = 4DNPCNPrUMENA, where DNP is the
diffusion coef?cient of nanoparticles, NA is Avogadro’s constant and rUME is the radius of
the TiO2@Au UME. The value of DNP can be estimated using the Stokes?Einstein
relationship by DNP = kBT/(6??rNP), where kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is temperature,
? is the viscosity of the solution and rNP is the radius of the N719@TiO2 or N719@ZnO
nanoparticle. The experimental results and the theoretical ones (calculated according to
Fick’s diffusion laws) are plotted in Supplementary Fig. 7.
? Steps 1–13, fabrication and characterization of TiO2@Au UMEs: ~24 h
? Steps 14–16, experimental setup for photoelectrochemical measurement: ~24 h
? Steps 17–19, photoelectrochemical measurement of an individual entity: ~1 h
? Steps 20–22, data processing using custom-designed software and OriginLab: ~1.5 h
? Steps 23, con?rmation of a single-entity photoelectrochemical event: ~4 h
In this protocol, we have described detailed procedures for fabrication of an ultrasensitive photo-
electrochemical platform, which could be widely used for real-time monitoring of the electron-
transfer process of a single entity in various photoelectrochemical systems. Two types of oxide
semiconductor (TiO2 and ZnO) nanoparticles with N719 dye modi?cation were prepared for
intrinsic photoelectrochemical behavior measurements in dye-sensitized solar cells and visible-light
water-splitting systems, respectively. UV-visible and FTIR spectra (Step A(vi, vii) and step 1B(vii) of
Box 2) were used to characterize N719 molecules anchored on the surface of ZnO or TiO2 nano-
particles via bidentate carboxylate linkages (Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12). For TiO2@Au UME, a
cross-sectional SEM image shows a compact TiO2 ?lm with a thickness of 4.4 ?m (Fig. 4a). Top-view
SEM images of TiO2@Au UMEs reveal that the desired highly accessible nanocrystalline TiO2
nanoparticulate ?lm has been coated onto the surface of the Au UME. Figure 4b displays the time-
resolved photocurrent responses of TiO2@Au UME as the UV light is turned on and off. In addition,
Fig. 4c shows a typical UME voltammogram with a well-resolved limiting current for 1-mM ferro-
cene, 1-mM N719 acetonitrile solution at the TiO2@Au UME surface. An enhanced limiting current
was observed under visible-light illumination as compared to the data obtained in dark conditions.
All characterization results demonstrated the successful fabrication of a micron-thickness nano-
particulate TiO2 ?lm with a substantially high electron mobility and photoconductivity.
Current–time curves of individual N719@TiO2 entities colliding with a TiO2@Au UME are col-
lected in acetonitrile solutions containing 10 mM LiI and 1 mM I2 (Step 19A). Under visible light,
substantial current transients were observed at +600 mV after the injection of the freshly prepared
N719@TiO2 nanoparticles into the electrolyte solution; however, negligible transient signals were
obtained in the dark (Fig. 5a). This indicates the photoinduced electron transfer does not occur
without photoexcitation. Note that no current signal was observed for the neat electrolyte solution
without N719@TiO2 entities, with illumination or without. Moreover, current–time responses
showed a ?at curve (no current spikes) in the absence of I?/I3? redox electrolyte under illumination.
This is because the I?/I3? redox pair acts as an ef?cient electron donor for N719. There would be no
continuing electron ?ow in this case if there were no I?/I3? present in the electrolyte. In addition, no
current transient was observed for individual bare TiO2 nanoparticles without the N719 dye mod-
i?cation in an amperometric current–time curve (Supplementary Fig. 8), demonstrating that the
collected electrons result from the photo-excited N719 moieties under visible-light illumination.
Figure 5b shows the representative current traces that initially rise quickly and decay at a slower rate
for individual N719@ TiO2 entities. The most population of collision events had a mean duration of
0.4 ± 0.1 ms (Fig. 5c) and a mean amplitude of 21.5 ± 2.0 pA (Fig. 5d). Considering the electron
recombination in a multiple-trapping TiO2 ?lm, the effective number of collected electrons for a
single N719 molecule per typical collision (Ne) at a TiO2@Au UME from the measured transients was
calculated by Ne = Q/neNN719, where Q is the integrated charge of individual events, n is the number
of electrons involved in the photoelectrochemical reaction (1 for N719), e is the elementary charge
and NN719 is the average number of N719 molecules modi?ed onto the surface of a single TiO2
nanoparticle surface (~600; Supplementary Fig. 9). Average integrated charge of individual events was
estimated to be 4.9 ± 1.3 fC from photocurrent transients (Fig. 5e). This allows us to calculate an Ne
value of 51 ± 4 per N719 molecule (Fig. 5f), revealing the intrinsic electron-transfer number of a
single N719 molecule for a typical collision. In this measurement, the TiO2 ?lm is essential to the
successful trapping of the photoinduced electron-transfer process because no collision event could be
observed for N719@TiO2 entities at a bare Au UME (Supplementary Fig. 1). This could be attributed
to instantaneous collisions of individual entities beyond the measurement capability of current
electrochemical instrumentation or high energy dissipation for the transfer of electrons through the
TiO2 semiconductor–Au metal interface56.
As a parallel study, we also investigated single-entity photoelectrochemistry for N719@ZnO
nanoparticles suspended in a DMSO–water solution at TiO2@Au UMEs with different TiO2 ?lm
thicknesses (Step 19B). Owing to the varying diffusion and recombination processes of the photo-
injected electrons in the different nanoparticulate TiO2 networks, thickness-dependent current traces
were observed for individual N719@ZnO nanoparticle collisions corresponding to single-entity
photocatalytic water oxidation (Fig. 6a). The current, charge, collision frequency and Ne of individual
N719@ZnO nanoparticles as functions of the TiO2 ?lm thickness were plotted (Fig. 6b). A repre-
sentative current–time curve at a 4.4-?m-thick TiO2@Au UME under visible light or in the dark is
shown in Supplementary Fig. 10a. The photocatalytic water oxidation for oxygen evolution was
further demonstrated by gas chromatographic results under visible-light irradiation (Supplementary
Fig. 10b)41. Furthermore, the turnover number (TON = Q/neNN719) for oxygen evolution of a single
N719 per collision was estimated to be 285 ± 12 at a 4.4-?m TiO2@Au UME (Supplementary
Fig. 10c). In addition, the measured results of TiO2 ?lm thickness-dependent current traces further
demonstrated that a trap-limited electron diffusion process was the rate-limiting step in our single-
entity photoelectrochemical measurement.
Reporting Summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary
linked to this article.
Acknowledgements
Author contributions
Competing interests
Additional information
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
