Title:
Effect of oral administration of nicotinamide
mononucleotide on clinical parameters and
nicotinamide metabolite levels in healthy Japanese men

Abstract:
Abstract.?Recent studies have revealed that decline in cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) levels causes
aging-related disorders and therapeutic approaches increasing cellular NAD+ prevent these disorders in animal models. The
administration of nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) has been shown to mitigate aging-related dysfunctions. However, the
safety of NMN in humans have remained unclear. We, therefore, conducted a clinical trial to investigate the safety of single
NMN  administration  in  10  healthy  men.  A  single-arm  non-randomized  intervention  was  conducted  by  single  oral
administration of  100, 250, and 500 mg  NMN. Clinical findings  and parameters, and the pharmacokinetics of NMN
metabolites were investigated for 5 h after each intervention. Ophthalmic examination and sleep quality assessment were also
conducted before and after the intervention. The single oral administrations of NMN did not cause any significant clinical
symptoms or changes in heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and body temperature. Laboratory analysis results did
not show significant changes, except for increases in serum bilirubin levels and decreases in serum creatinine, chloride, and
blood glucose levels within the normal ranges, independent of the dose of NMN. Results of ophthalmic examination and sleep
quality score showed no differences before and after the intervention. Plasma concentrations of N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-
carboxamide  and  N-methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide  were  significantly  increased  dose-dependently  by  NMN
administration. The single oral administration of NMN was safe and effectively metabolized in healthy men without causing
any significant deleterious effects. Thus, the oral administration of NMN was found to be feasible, implicating a potential
therapeutic strategy to mitigate aging-related disorders in humans.

----------------------
Subtitles:

 Materials and Methods
 Patients and methods
 Analysis of nicotinamide metabolites
 Statistical analyses
 Results
 Discussion
 Disclosure


Text:
----------------------
AGING increases incidences of age-associated diseases,
such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes,
obesity, hypertension, macular degeneration, and many
others. Prevention of age-associated diseases has increas?
ingly become important because the average human life?
span has been extended worldwide. Recent studies have
shown that decreases in nicotinamide adenine dinucleo?
tide (NAD+) levels in multiple tissues contribute to the
pathogenesis of age-associated functional disorders [1].
Thus, preventive and therapeutic interventions with key
NAD+ intermediates, such as nicotinamide mononucleo?
tide (NMN) and nicotinamide riboside (NR), which can
Materials and Methods
Patients and methods
We performed a nonblinded clinical trial in 10 healthy
men to investigate the pharmacokinetics of nicotinamide
metabolites and evaluate the safety of orally adminis?
tered NMN at the Clinical Trial Unit, Keio University
School of Medicine, Japan. The healthy male subjects,
who were 40 to 60 years of age and agreed to participate
in the trial, were recruited. Subjects having 1) a previous
history of diseases, 2) malignant neoplasms, 3) serious
infections, 4) psychiatric disorders, 5) ophthalmic disor?
ders, 6) allergic disorders, or 7) metabolic diseases were
excluded.
The subjects orally received 100, 250, or 500 mg of
NMN in capsules at 9 AM after an overnight fasting at
each visit and followed for 5 h at rest with drinking only
water freely. The interval of each visit was longer than
one week. The measurement of height and body weight,
a physical examination by registered physicians, and
chest radiography and electrocardiography were conduct?
ed before and after the intervention. Heart rate, blood
pressure, oxygen saturation, and body temperature were
monitored for 5 h after the administration of NMN.
Urine collections were conducted every 30 to 60 min for
the first 2 h and at the end of the study, and urine sam?
ples were analyzed as previously reported [8]. Blood
samples were obtained from the forearm vein via an
inserted catheter every 5 to 20 min for the first 1 h, fol?
lowed by every 30 to 120 min for the next 4 h on the
basis of the findings that plasma NMN levels decreased
to baseline in 30 minutes after oral administration of
NMN in mice and that serum nicotinamide levels
Analysis of nicotinamide metabolites
Blood samples were stored in a cooled heparinized
tube and centrifuged at 4°C for 5 min. The obtained
plasma was frozen under –80°C until analysis. Levels of
nicotinamide metabolites including methylnicotinamide
Statistical analyses
Differences between two groups were examined by
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The changes from the
baseline in clinical parameters and laboratory data were
estimated by using the mixed-effects model for repeated
measures model with a compound symmetry covariance
structure. Bonferroni’s multiple comparison was conduc?
ted to identify the time and group differences.
Pearson’s correlation analysis was used to analyze
statistical correlation between two parameters. A p value
of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statisti?
Results
Discussion
The single oral administration of NMN did not cause
any specific deleterious effects in healthy men, whereas
nicotinamide has been known to induce nausea and
flushing, thereby causing difficulty in using nicotinamide
at high amounts to increase cellular NAD+ [14]. Because
we did not observe adverse events such as nausea, NMN
would not increase nicotinamide blood levels enough to
cause any adverse events in this study. Moreover, the
administration of nicotinamide at a very high dose has
been reported to induce hepatoxicity, but we did not
observe any adverse effects of NMN on liver enzymes
[14]. Whereas the plasma bilirubin levels increased, the
glucose levels decreased significantly within the refer?
ence range. It is likely that these changes were due to
fasting for 5 h [15]. All other parameters did not show
any clinically significant changes at any single dose of
NMN. Overall, NMN was well tolerated up to a single
dose of 500 mg.
We previously reported that the light-dark cycle regu?
lated the retinal expression of nicotinamide phosphoribo?
syltransferase (Nampt), which converts nicotinamide to
NMN, and that photoreceptor-specific deletion of Nampt
caused retinal NAD+ deficiency and degeneration in
mice [5, 16]. Moreover, the supplementation of NMN
prevented the age-associated changes in the fundus as
well as decline in retinal response and lacrimal gland
functioning in 17-month-old C57BL/6N mice [4]. In this
study, no single dose of NMN changed eye functions.
The intraocular pressure tended to decrease after the
administration of 100 mg NMN. However, it was repor?
ted to decrease in the postmeridian period so that the
change could simply be due to diurnal variations [17].
In this study, we also performed preliminary evalua?
tion of the sleep quality by PSQI score before and after
the intervention with NMN. In mice, Sirt1, a mammalian
NAD+-dependent protein deacetylase, has been reported
to be involved in the homeostatic regulation of sleep in
the hypothalamus [18]. In our study, the indices did not
show any significant differences by the intervention.
We showed that 2Py and 4Py levels significantly
increased and their incremental areas above the baseline
were increased in a dose-dependent manner. A previous
study reported that the incremental changes in NAD+
level were correlated with those in MNA and 2Py levels
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in healthy subject
after the administration of NR [19]. The finding supports
the speculation that the administration of NMN increased
tissue NAD+ and plasma metabolites such as MNA, 2Py,
and 4Py in this study. The levels of 2Py and 4Py at base?
line in our study were consistent with those in a previous
study reporting that the mean serum concentrations of
2Py and 4Py were 830 nM and 260 nM, respectively, in
healthy subjects [20]. In addition, we found that the
incremental areas above the baseline for 300 min in 2Py
were strongly correlated with those in 4Py and the ratio
of 2Py to 4Py was constant among the subjects. These
findings indicated that administered NMN was degraded
and converted to 2Py and 4Py proportionally in the
healthy subjects. However, the incremental areas in 2Py
and 4Py varied largely by the subjects in this study. The
difference may be explained by an efficiency of absorp?
tion and metabolism of NMN, although the precise kinet?
ics of NMN were not evaluated in this study.
Unfortunately, we failed to detect NMN in plasma sam?
ples in this study, most likely because freezing plasma
samples before extraction might have caused the degra?
dation of NMN. The procedure of blood sampling could
have also contributed to the failure of the detection of
NMN, because the recent reports showed that NMN was
degraded very rapidly in blood that was handled above –
80°C [7, 21].
There are several limitations to this study. First, the
study was not a placebo-controlled study. Therefore, it
was not clear if the alteration in clinical and laboratory
data was due to the administration of NMN or fasting for
5 h. In fact, the decrease in blood glucose level and the
increase in serum bilirubin level were consistent with the
findings frequently observed in healthy men after fasting
[15]. Nonetheless, the dose-dependent increases in 2Py
and 4Py levels in plasma samples supported the dose-
dependent uptake of NMN in the subjects. Second, the
long-term administration of NMN should be conducted
to further investigate the safety and the efficacy of NMN
as a new treatment for age-associated disorders. Third,
tissue NAD+ and plasma NMN levels were not measured
in this study. Our next clinical study to evaluate plasma
NMN levels and NAD+ levels in peripheral blood mono?
nuclear cells is now in progress. If possible, biopsy sam?
ples from tissues such as the adipose tissue and skeletal
muscle need to be analyzed for tissue NMN and NAD+
levels.
In conclusion, the single oral administration of NMN
up to 500 mg was safe and well-tolerated in healthy men
without causing any significant deleterious effects. Thus,
oral administration of NMN is feasible and could be a
therapeutic strategy to replenish cellular NAD+ levels to
mitigate aging-related functional disorders in humans.
The pharmacokinetics of NMN and NAD+ in the plasma
and tissues need to be investigated in future studies.
Disclosure
S.I. is an inventor on patents about the use of NMN
(PCT/US2014/30920) and about the Slc12a8 NMN
transporter (PCT/US2018/46233), whose applicant is
Washington University and which have been licensed by
MetroBiotech (U.S.A.) and Teijin Limited (Japan),
respectively. S.S., T.O., and H.Y. are employed by Shio?
nogi & Co., Ltd. H.I. received research funding from
Oriental Yeast Co., Ltd.
