Title:
Library-driven approach for fast implementation of the voxel spread function
to correct magnetic ?eld inhomogeneity artifacts for gradient-echo
sequences

Abstract:

----------------------


Text:
----------------------
It is well-known that macroscopic B0 magnetic field inhomo-
geneity adversely affect quantitative measurements of relax-
ation parameters obtained with multi-Gradient-Recalled-
Echo (mGRE) MRI if not accounted for.
It was demonstrated recently that quantitative mGRE-
based approach incorporating voxel spread function (VSF)
method for field inhomogeneity correction1 provides quanti-
tative information on brain tissue cellular structure2 as well as
its alterations under healthy aging3 and different neurological
diseases.4–7 The VSF method takes advantage of utilizing
both magnitude and phase information of mGRE data from a
single scan, hence it saves acquisition time and avoids mis-
registration errors. However, a direct implementation of the
VSF method requires a large number of voxel-dependent con-
volutions resulting in long computational time.
In this study, we propose a library-driven approach for fast
implementation of the VSF method. Instead of the direct
voxel-wise calculation, a pre-calculated library accounting
for a variety of background field gradients caused by mag-
netic field inhomogeneity is used. The library-driven
approach substantially reduces the computational time of
VSF from hours to a few minutes, and provides similar accu-
racy compared with the direct calculation. This can facilitate
the applications of mGRE-based quantitative techniques in
clinical practices.
As described previously,1 MR signal in the presence of
inhomogeneous magnetic field b(r) can be represented as
follows: Z
(1)
where k and r represent the k space and image space, respec-
tively, ? is the gyromagnetic ratio, ?0(r) is the signal phase
shift at TE = 0. Here, we only considered the gradient echo
time TE and ignore the time during gradient echo acquisition.
By using a linear approximation, b(r) and ?0(r) can be repre-
sented in the nth voxel as follows:
(2)
(3)
Assuming each imaging voxel has volume V = axayaz,
then ?rx,y,z ? [?0.5ax,y,z, 0.5ax,y,z]. Thus, by substituting b(r)
and ?0(r) using Eqs. (2) and (3) and assuming that the “ideal”
signal ?(r; TE) only slightly varies across the voxels, the MR
signal in Eq. (1) can be rewritten for discrete imaging voxels
as follows:
~Sðk?TEÞ¼
(5)
F1o=r2, ea1c=h2þ1d=imNeqn,s.i.o.,n1=2(j =1=xN,qyi,s thez)1, D normalized
k-space. Nq represents number of q-points used in the calcula-
(6)
(4)
where ?n(TE) is the “ideal” signal from the nth voxel that is
free from B0-field inhomogeneity artifacts. The function P(q;
q n; TE) has the form:
where g?,j ¼ ?  gn,j  aj and gp,j ¼ ? Gn,j aj are the gradients
for the nth voxel calculated from the spatially unwrapped fre-
quency ? and phase ?0, respectively.
By applying Fourier transform to Eq. (4), the image of
mGRE-MRI Sn(TE) can be expressed as follows:
where ?nm(TE) is a voxel-dependent convolution kernel,
which in the 3D case can be presented as follows:
(8)
where the voxel indices n and m are considered as 3D vectors:
(nx, ny, nz) and (mx, my, mz), ?m is the frequency shifts. The
(9)
In some circumstance, Hanning filter is often employed to
reduce Gibbs ringing artifacts and improve the signal-to-
noise ratio. For images obtained with the Hanning filter, Eq.
(9) should be modified by adding an dditional factor
cos2ð?qÞ. In the 2D case, the factor ?z ¼ sinc qm,zðTEÞ .
Using the similarity approximation:
Eq. (7) reduces to.
In practice, the sum in Eq. (12) is taken over several voxels
adjacent to a given voxel n. Even for few neighbors included
in this sum (as shown previously1), a large number of voxel-
dependent convolutions leads to long computational time.
For a typical head scan using mGRE sequence with a matrix
size of 256 × 256 × 72 × 10 (readout, phase encoding,
slices, echoes), the calculation time of the F-function in Mat-
lab using 4 neighbors on each dimension could take several
hours on a computer with typical configurations.
In the voxel-wise direct calculation, factors ? are calcu-
lated independently for each voxel. As mentioned above, this
procedure usually costs long computational time. In this
study, we propose a new way to substantially accelerate the
calculation by using a pre-calculated library for ?. As shown
in Eq. (9), the factors ? depend on three parameters: the phase
dispersion qm, neighbor index (n-m), and Nq. When phased-
array coils and channel combination methods8,9 are used, ini-
tial phase ?0 are eliminated, and the parameter qm depends
only on the frequency gradient g?. Relatively large maximum
g? value should be chosen to sufficiently cover the gradient
variations of frequency ? for library building. In our case of
imaging the human brain, we found maximum g? value of
1500 rads/voxel is sufficient. When using an accuracy of 0.1
rads/voxel, a total number of 30,000 points is sufficient to
build the library for ?. Although ? also depends on the num-
ber of q-points in the sum in Eq. (9), our simulation shows
that as long as using a sufficient large Nq ? 256, the factor ?
is fairly stable (see Fig. 1).
According to Eq. (9), changing the sign of either qm or
neighbor index ?N = (n – m) will result in a complex conju-
gate of ?, one can only use non-negative values of q and non-
negative neighbor index ?N for calculations. This can further
reduce the computational time for library building. This
library of ? is then used for F-function calculation: for each
voxel and its neighbors with particular gm values, correspond-
ing values of ? can be readily found from the library. Impor-
tantly, replacing the direct computation by this new library-
driven approach substantially reduces the computing time
from hours to a few minutes. As long as including suffi-
ciently large Nq and number of neighboring voxels, the
library only needs to be built once and can be used for future
calculations. The detailed procedure of library building and
F-function calculation is shown in Fig. 2: First, parameters
are determined for library building. When using a maximum
value of 1500 rads/voxel and an accuracy of 0.1 rads/voxel, a
total number of 30,000 points of g? ranging from ?1500 to
1499.9 rads/voxel are used to build the library for ?. For Han-
ning filtered data, 4 neighbors (?N = n – m = [?2, ?1, 0, 1,
2]) is enough for each dimension. For non-Hanning filtered
data, more neighbors (usually more than 8) are needed. As
shown in Fig. 1, Nq = 256 can be used for ? calculation (step
A in Fig. 2). Second, a library of ? is built using the parame-
ters determined in step A, and the indices n1 and n2 represent
different g? values and neighbors ?N (step B in Fig. 2). At
the same time, magnitude and phase images are obtained
from the complex dataset (step C in Fig. 2). Magnitude
images of the 1st echo are used as an approximation of |S(0)|
in Eq. (12). Frequency maps are obtained by performing a
linear fitting of the phase images (step D in Fig. 2). Gradients
g? are calculated from the frequency maps (step E in Fig. 2).
Indices n1 and n2 are calculated for g? and neighbor index
?N using parameters in step A:
n1 ¼ g? þ1500þ1 þ 1
0:1 2
Images were collected from two healthy volunteers (both
are 26 years old female) using a 3T MRI scanner (GE Dis-
covery 750w) equipped with a 12-channel phased-array head
Indices n1 and n2 help to quickly locate ? values in the
library (step F in Fig. 2), which avoids direct calculation of
Eq. (9) and save computational time. Last, ?, |S(0)|, frequency
and g? values are used to calculate F-function (step G in
Fig. 2).
ated Hospital of USTC. All the participating healthy volun-
teers provided written consents.
High-resolution datasets with a voxel size of
1 × 1 × 2 mm3 were
acquired using a three-dimensional
(3D) mGRE sequence (ESWAN on GE scanners) with a flip
angle of 20° and TR = 50.4 ms. For each acquisition, 10
echoes were collected with first echo time TE1 = 3.4 ms
and echo spacing ?TE = 3.8 ms. The total acquisition time
was around 11 min. The complex images from different
channels were combined using a previously introduced
method.8,9 The combined mGRE datasets were then used for
calculation of the F-function and transverse relaxation rate
constant (R2*). The libraries were built for three different
values of the parameter Nq (512, 256, 128). The F-function
was calculated with 4 neighbors on each dimension for
Hanning-filtered data and 16 neighbors for non-filtered data.
A maximum value of 1500 rads/voxel and a step of 0.1 rads/
voxel were used for the gradient gm. R2* maps were calcu-
lated by performing a least square fitting of the mGRE data-
sets using a mono-exponential model. Previous numerical
simulations1 showed that the field inhomogeneity can distort
linear behavior of the signal phase. Hence, we used qm <
0.3 as a criteria to only use short TE for R2* fitting in
those regions where the field inhomogeneity is severe. All
computations were done in Matlab2019a (The MathWorks,
Inc., Natick MA, USA) on a computer with standard config-
urations: 3.2 GHz CPU and 16 GB RAM.
The comparison of the F-functions calculated using direct
voxel-wise calculation and library-driven approach is shown
in Fig. 3. The direct calculation of the F-function takes about
5 hrs and 30 min on a computer with a 3.2 GHz CPU and
16 GB RAM, while the new method requires only 3 min on
the same computer. The library building process using
parameters introduced in the “Methods” costs less than 30 s
on the same computer. The differences between these two
methods are below 10-4 for the F-function and 10-3 for R2*,
respectively (panels C, F).
As shown in Fig. 4, we compared R2* distributions within
different ROIs. In the pre-frontal ROI marked by the yellow
dashed box, standard deviation (SD) values of R2*
distributions calculated using voxel-wise method and new
library-driven method are 4.184 and 4.188 1/s, respectively. In
the brain outside yellow dashed box, corresponding SD val-
ues of R2* distributions for the two methods are 4.068 and
4.067 1/s, respectively.
R2* maps calculated using the F-function with different
number of q-points Nq are shown in Fig. 5. Accurate R2* cal-
culations are guaranteed when sufficient large number of q-
points in Eq. (9) (Nq ? 256) are employed, which coincides
with the simulation results.
Macroscopic B0 magnetic field inhomogeneity adversely
affects MRI images, especially the ones based on a gradient
echo acquisition. They not only lead to image distortions,10
but also degrade quantitative measurements of relaxation
parameters8,11–15 if not accounted for. Numerous methods
have been proposed to correct for these adverse effects,
including correcting methods during data collection.16–24 and
post processing approaches.25–30 In this paper we focus on
the VSF method1 that allows accounting for the effects of
magnetic field inhomogeneity in data obtained with mGRE
sequences.
Quantitative parameters that are derived using mGRE-
based techniques, such as R2* mapping, are usually suffered
from magnetic field inhomogeneity artifacts. These artifacts
are extremely severe in those regions that are close to the
tissue-air interfaces, i.e. in sinuses. These artifacts often dete-
riorate the quantitative measurements, thus hinder the clinical
application of these quantitative techniques. The VSF method
was proposed previously to correct for this effect, however,
direct voxel-by-voxel calculations of the F-function requires
long computational time. In this study, we presented a
library-driven approach for fast VSF implementation. By
using a pre-calculated library, the calculation time of the F-
function has been reduced from 5 hrs and 30 min to 3 min
on a computer with a standard configuration (3.2 GHz CPU
and 16 GB RAM). By comparing directly with the voxel-
wise method, we demonstrated that the library-driven method
provided similar accuracy compared with the direct calcula-
tion (Fig. 3), even in the high susceptibility area such as pre-
frontal regions (Fig. 4).
Based on simulations (Fig. 1) and experiments (Fig. 5),
we demonstrated that by selecting a sufficient number of q-
points (Nq) and the number of neighboring voxels included in
the sum in Eq. (9) to build the library, the new library-driven
method substantially reduces computational time while, at
the same time, provides similar accuracy compared with the
direct voxel-wise calculation. The reduction of computational
time makes it feasible to implement the VSF method with
more neighbors, which is necessary for non- filtered data.
We demonstrated the capability of the proposed method to
substantially reduce B0 inhomogeneity artifacts on quantita-
tive R2* mapping. However, it should be noted that the pro-
posed method is based on certain “linear” approximation
[Eqs. (2) and (3)] that is appropriate for high resolution MRI.
It might fail to correct low resolution data and data near the
edge of an object where the gradients gm are strong. If the
“linear” approximation is not sufficient for calculating effect
of field inhomogeneity across the voxel, then Eq. (5) should
be substituted by a more general integral that is taken across a
single voxel. In this case, the distribution of magnetic field
and phases can be found from an independent experiment
with higher resolution.
In conclusion, we presented a library-driven approach for
fast VSF method implementation. The new procedure pro-
vides a fast way to correct mGRE-based images for back-
ground field inhomogeneity artifacts, thus can facilitate the
applications of mGRE-based quantitative techniques in clini-
cal practices.
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
The data that support the findings of this study are avail-
able on request from the corresponding author. The data are
not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.
Additional supporting information may be found online in
the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.
Data S1. Fast library-driven approach for the two-step itera-
tive calculation of the voxel spread function.
