Title:
Magnetic 
fields for
modulating 
the nervous 
system

Abstract:
Neuroscience research has grown rapidly in recent
years, driven at least in part by the emergence of
tools and techniques that enable scientists to pose 
experimental questions that not long ago would have
been unanswerable. Methods for triggering activity
in the nervous systems of living animal models have proven particularly
useful for mapping networks, probing structure– unction relationships,
and connecting physiology to behavior. In addition, therapeutically
controlling the activity of neurons in patients can offer relief from
some diseases. For example, an approach that clinicians use to stimulate
neurons  deep in  the  brain to  treat  Parkinson’s  disease  has  also
shown promise for addressing persistent psychiatric disorders such
as depression.

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

Technologies for stimulating neurons are poised to become
increasingly signi?cant, yet the presently employed methods
have serious drawbacks. As is so often the case for biomedical
technology, today’s innovations will appear primitive in the
not- oo-distant future. Currently, clinical deep-brain stimula-
tion is conducted primarily by inserting millimeter-sized
electrodes that are powered by devices implanted in the body.
Although e?ective at o?ering relief for patients, such drastic
measures are justi?able in only extreme cases. Technology for
more commonplace neuron stimulation, whether for experi-
ments in model organisms or clinical therapy in humans, should
be noninvasive or minimally invasive, wireless, able to access
regions deep in the brain, spatially targeted, and selective to
particular cell types.
That vision has attracted numerous engineers and scientists
to independently focus on developing devices and methods
for coupling noninvasive stimuli—including ultrasound, near-
Neurons propagate electrochemical signals by using voltage-
gated biochemical machinery in their membranes. At the level
of a single cell, a stimulus that depolarizes a small part of the
membrane can cause an action potential that spreads through-
out the cell. Some channel proteins function by locally increasing
too weak to actuate membrane proteins in the manner envi-
sioned. Several independent research groups subsequently re-
ported an inability to demonstrate similar magnetogenetic ef-
fects in their own laboratories, although a failure to replicate is
not necessarily conclusive. The authors of the original works
have since pointed out ways in which the replication attempts
may have di?ered from their original experiments.
A conceptual rebuttal to the biophysical argument against
 erritin-mediated magnetogenetics has been that the magnetic
moment of ferritin may be about 75 times larger than expected,
which would allow for an assortment of hypothetical actuation
mechanisms.4 Such a large magnetic moment would be sur-
prising given the extensive body of literature characterizing
ferritin, although a fresh investigation may be warranted. Even
if anomalously enhanced magnetic properties could be de?ni-
tively ruled out by experiment, asserting the impossibility of
magnetogenetics may be overly reductionist.
A feeble magnetic moment for ferritin at most precludes the
possibility of direct actuation. Some of the relevant magnetic
stimuli produce o?- arget e?ects, including induced voltages
and mild nonselective heating. In principle, a modi?ed channel
protein that lowers the threshold of response to those in?u-
ences by any means, magnetic or otherwise, might lead to se-
lective actuation e?ects. An indirect mechanism of that sort
might help explain experimental observations, although a strat-
egythat depends on many external factors is likely to face di?-
culties in replication or routine use.
Recent experimental work has indicated a possible chemical
pathway for actuation that involves iron released from ferritin.5
too weak to actuate membrane proteins in the manner envi-
sioned. Several independent research groups subsequently re-
ported an inability to demonstrate similar magnetogenetic ef-
fects in their own laboratories, although a failure to replicate is
not necessarily conclusive. The authors of the original works
have since pointed out ways in which the replication attempts
may have di?ered from their original experiments.
A conceptual rebuttal to the biophysical argument against
 erritin-mediated magnetogenetics has been that the magnetic
moment of ferritin may be about 75 times larger than expected,
which would allow for an assortment of hypothetical actuation
mechanisms.4 Such a large magnetic moment would be sur-
prising given the extensive body of literature characterizing
ferritin, although a fresh investigation may be warranted. Even
if anomalously enhanced magnetic properties could be de?ni-
tively ruled out by experiment, asserting the impossibility of
magnetogenetics may be overly reductionist.
A feeble magnetic moment for ferritin at most precludes the
possibility of direct actuation. Some of the relevant magnetic
stimuli produce o?- arget e?ects, including induced voltages
and mild nonselective heating. In principle, a modi?ed channel
protein that lowers the threshold of response to those in?u-
ences by any means, magnetic or otherwise, might lead to se-
lective actuation e?ects. An indirect mechanism of that sort
might help explain experimental observations, although a strat-
egythat depends on many external factors is likely to face di?-
culties in replication or routine use.
Recent experimental work has indicated a possible chemical
pathway for actuation that involves iron released from ferritin.5
However, the way that magnetic ?elds alternating at kilohertz
or megahertz frequencies might trigger ion release remains
unanswered. Other experiments that used modi?ed channel
proteins suggest that extinguishing temperature sensitivity elim-
inates magnetic response and that having a magnetocaloric
cooling e?ect may trigger a related channel sensitivity to cold
rather than heat.6
An encouraging feature of recent e?orts is a renewed focus
on probing and explaining mechanisms. Nevertheless, one of
the signi?cant di?culties in making comparisons and drawing
conclusions in the magnetogenetics literature is the sheer vari-
ety of magnetic stimuli, which allows every group to adopt its
own seemingly unique stimulation paradigm. The situation is
especially evident in the remarkable contrast between the mag-
netic conditions employed in the most recent experiments,
ranging from 12 ?T ?elds varying at 180 MHz to 250 mT ?elds
varying at 800 mHz.
Yet another route to magnetogenetics that researchers have
suggested draws inspiration from nature. Numerous organ-
isms exhibit what’s known as magnetoreception— he ability
to sense Earth’s comparatively weak 50 ?T magnetic field,
usually as a cue for migratory navigation (see the article by
Sönke Johnsen and Ken Lohmann, PHYSICSTODAY, March 2008,
page 29). Specialized magnetic receptor cells, similar to sensory
systems that detect light or sound, have been hypothesized to
exist. If such cells were unambiguously identi?ed and thor-
oughly studied, perhaps their mechanism of sensation could
be replicated through genetic modi?cation. But that remains a
remote possibility considering that decades of vigorous research
and debate have yet to produce satisfactory explanations for
natural magnetoreception.7
Another widespread category of techniques for magnetic stim-
ulation of neurons employs synthetic nanomaterials. Usually
introduced by direct injection, the materials o?er an energetically
plausible means of coupling an externally applied magnetic ?eld
to well-understood forms of stimulation. Whereas clusters of
noninteracting atoms are expected to exhibit modest magnetic
moments at best, collective ferro- or ferrimagnetic ordering me-
diated by exchange or superexchange interactions can lead to
magnetic moments that are many orders of magnitude larger.
For magnetized particles smaller than a critical size range
that depends on composition and geometry, opposing mag-
netic domains do not form, and the structures are approxi-
mately uniformly magnetized. The presence of magnetic order
does not necessarily imply that the orientation of the magneti-
zation remains constant. Rather, the magnetization orientation
can rapidly precess and jump stochastically among certain pre-
ferred directions. Under conditions at which the rate of the sto-
chastic jumps is much faster than the time scale of measure-
ment, magnetic particles are said to be superparamagnetic.
Examples of magnetic nanoparticles do occur in nature, most
famously in bacteria that employ chains of magnetite or greig-
ite particles for coordinating their movement along magnetic
?eld lines (see the article by David Dunlop, PHYSICSTODAY, June
2012, page 31). However, for neurostimulation methods based
on magnetic nanoparticles, researchers typically prefer synthetic
materials that can be produced in large quantities with tai-
lorable surface chemistries. Because of their biocompatibility,
ferrites are common, especially maghemite, magnetite, and
similar compounds doped with neighboring transition metal
elements, such as manganese, cobalt, and nickel. Many ap-
proaches have been reported, so researchers ?nd it helpful to
classify them by the waysthey transduce magnetic ?elds to de-
tectable stimuli. Those categories, which are summarized in
?gure 3, include the production of forces or torques, magneto-
electric coupling, actuation via dissipated heat, and triggered
release of chemical agonists.
Sensory neurons in the peripheral nervous system contain
channel proteins that respond to membrane tension or other
mechanical cues to produce the sensation of touch. Combining
magnetic and mechanical actuation is therefore a natural and
intuitive idea. An extensive body of literature exists that ad-
dresses biological e?ects produced in vitrowith magnetically
applied forces, including examples of neural stimulation. But
those methods typically require high ?eld gradients, on the
order of 10–103 T/m, which prohibits scaling them to most in
vivo contexts.
In contrast, mechanotransduction via torques generated by
rotating or alternating uniform ?elds is a comparably scalable
strategy. Particles suitable for applying torques must possess
su?ciently large moments and anisotropy that links their
physical orientation to their magnetization. For single-domain
nanoparticles, large moments and high anisotropy tend to 
heating. The standard heat-transfer equations suggest that the
temperature di?erence between the surface of the nanoparticles
and the solution should be more than a million times smaller
than some experiments have suggested.
An intriguing clue to explain the discrepancy came nearly
a decade later from a study that replicated a comparable method-
ology.11 Rather than interpreting similar observations as an in-
crease in surface temperature, the researchers suggested two
types of experimental artifacts that may account for the original
observation. Their ?ndings and other recent negative results
raise questions about the existence of nanoscale heating in sim-
ilar systems. Nevertheless, heat-transfer e?ects peculiar to the
nanoscale are studied extensively in solid systems and consid-
ered in terms of the transport of quantized phonon modes
rather than classical heat ?ow. Moreover, various nanoparticle
systems suspended in solution compellingly demonstrate care-
fully controlled heating e?ects and o?er researchers an oppor-
tunity to reexamine physical models of nanoscale heat trans-
port at crystalline-disordered interfaces.
Even without relying on nanoscale heating e?ects, heat can
still stimulate targeted neurons. The classical heat- ransport
equations allow for bulk heating of concentrated ferro?uid
droplets to stimulate neurons sensitized to increased tempera-
ture, an e?ect that has been demonstrated experimentally.12
One recent paper suggested an extension of those methods
heating. The standard heat-transfer equations suggest that the
temperature di?erence between the surface of the nanoparticles
and the solution should be more than a million times smaller
than some experiments have suggested.
An intriguing clue to explain the discrepancy came nearly
a decade later from a study that replicated a comparable method-
ology.11 Rather than interpreting similar observations as an in-
crease in surface temperature, the researchers suggested two
types of experimental artifacts that may account for the original
observation. Their ?ndings and other recent negative results
raise questions about the existence of nanoscale heating in sim-
ilar systems. Nevertheless, heat-transfer e?ects peculiar to the
nanoscale are studied extensively in solid systems and consid-
ered in terms of the transport of quantized phonon modes
rather than classical heat ?ow. Moreover, various nanoparticle
systems suspended in solution compellingly demonstrate care-
fully controlled heating e?ects and o?er researchers an oppor-
tunity to reexamine physical models of nanoscale heat trans-
port at crystalline-disordered interfaces.
Even without relying on nanoscale heating e?ects, heat can
still stimulate targeted neurons. The classical heat- ransport
equations allow for bulk heating of concentrated ferro?uid
droplets to stimulate neurons sensitized to increased tempera-
ture, an e?ect that has been demonstrated experimentally.12
One recent paper suggested an extension of those methods
based on bulk-heating e?ects: Known as magnetothermal
multiplexing, the approach heats adjacent ferro?uid droplets
independently by pairing di?erent types of magnetic nano-
materials with alternating magnetic ?eld conditions that ensure
selective heating.13
Another method readily extendable to chemical stimuli tar-
geted at particular channel proteins is the magnetically trig-
gered release of chemical payloads from nanoscale carriers.
The concept was originally explored primarily for drug deliv-
ery and diagnostics. Available carriers include nanoparticle
surfaces, thermally sensitive liposomes, and degradable poly-
mer composites. In one instance, researchers controlled neural
activity in freely behaving mice by triggering the release of
neurochemicals from thermally sensitive liposomes.14In the fu-
ture, chemomagnetic methods could be coupled with super-
imposed magnetostatic selection ?elds, which o?er spatial con-
trol in drug release.
Chemomagnetic methods are a relatively recent develop-
ment compared with the other approaches highlighted in this
section. Such chemomagnetic studies are a?ected by the uncer-
tainty surrounding nanoscale heating because they are often
performed at concentrations of magnetic nanoparticles that are
far below that required for bulk heating. Whether the phenom-
enon triggered by an alternating ?eld and leading to release
can be exclusively attributed to heat is a question worth further
consideration.
As described by Faraday’s law, time-varying magnetic ?uxes
induce electric ?elds in conductive media, which generate cur-
rents that oppose the change in ?ux. The e?ect, already put to
wide and varied technological use, o?ers a basis for neuronal
stimulation through e?ects experienced at the tissue scale or
via wirelessly powered devices.
Researchers have demonstrated that neurons in humans
can be stimulated using magnetic ?elds pulsed at millisecond
time scales—on the order of 104T/s with a peak amplitude of
up to 1 T—to produce rapid variations of the ?eld strength.15
Figure 4 depicts how placing current-carrying coils close to the
scalp stimulates neurons within the ?rst few centimeters of the
brain. The technique, called transcranial magnetic stimulation,
or TMS, has shown promise for treating depression, neuro-
pathic pain, and other disorders. 
But researchers face several challenges when highly tar-
geted stimulation is required. For example, changes in pulse
duration and the physical orientation of the neurons can sup-
press neuronal activity rather than stimulate it. Super?cial
brain structures receive a stronger stimulus than deeper ones
because magnetic ?eld magnitude decreases with the distance
from the coils. To improve spatial selectivity in their e?ects, re-
searchers commonly use ?gure-eight or butter?y-coil geome-
tries, both of which have two coils wound in opposite direc-
tions to focus stimulation e?ects near the point of overlap.
Others in the research community have suggested employ-
ing a similar e?ect in implanted devices as an alternative to the
conventional electrodes used for deep-brain stimulation that
apply potentials to inject small currents into their surroundings.
The alternative electrodes remain tethered to an external power
source and stimulate neurons in surrounding tissue through
inductive e?ects generated by an approximately 1-mm-diameter
solenoid.16 Although still invasive, the approach avoids scar-
ring, in which brain cells called glia accumulate around an elec-
trode and insulate it from its intended neuronal targets.
Inductively powered, untethered miniature devices im-
planted in the brain take the technology one step further and
have been demonstrated for neural stimulation in animal mod-
els.17 Miniaturization is constrained fundamentally by both a
device’s requirement to reach induced voltages that are phys-
iologically relevant and its reduced cross-sectional area. The
most successful of those neural-stimulation devices have a
highly permeable miniaturized ferrite core and a tightly wound
solenoid. They use a simple circuit that resonantly couples to
an alternating magnetic ?eld with a frequency in the low mega-
hertz range and that recti?es the resulting voltages for direct-
current stimulation.
The excitation coils can be thought of as the primary windings
of a transformer, and the device’s inductive pickup acts as the
secondary windings. A simple and compact resonant circuit
recti?es the induced voltage, which allows the device to inject
current into its surroundings and stimulate neurons. The de-
gree of the transformer’s inductive coupling is small compared
with more familiar transformers optimized for power transfer.
But the design of the device enables noninvasive stimulation
over a reasonable area in which an animal can freely move.
Other technical advantages of the approach include low power
requirements for alternating magnetic field generation and
the tunable resonance of the secondary coil. With multiple in-
dependently addressable devices, researchers may be able to
stimulatedi?erent sites in the brain.
The present e?orts to stimulate neurons with magnetic ?elds
serve as a reminder that progress in science is rarely linear.
Spurred by the unmet need for a tool useful to neuroscientists
and clinicians alike, independent researchers have produced
intriguing ideas and strategies to tackle the same underlying
problem. Work that garners the greatest attention is the kind
that seeks to shift existing paradigms, so perhaps it should be
unsurprising when controversy follows closely behind some of
the most prominent claims.
In those cases, a noticeable pattern emerges: Objections often
center on foreseeable, fundamental explanatory shortcomings.
Even when researchers have sought to defend the reproducibil-
ity of their results, they have frequently retreated from their
initial statements about mechanisms. Arguably, that outcome
is more a consequence of mindset than of expertise.
The fundamental orientation toward problem-solving often
fostered in the physical sciences allows one to break di?cult
problems into solvable pieces and to test plausibility with sim-
pli?ed arguments rather than perfectly recapitulate reality.
Thatway of thinking has already led independent researchers
to make valuable contributions toward magnetic control over
neurons, and additional engagement and dialog with physical
scientists could help accelerate progress in neuroscience.
