Document Infomation ===========>
Title=null
Author=null
Subject=null
Keywords=null
Creator=null
Producer=iTextSharp™ 5.5.4 ©2000-2014 iText Group NV (AGPL-version)
Creation Date=java.util.GregorianCalendar[time=1583919437000,areFieldsSet=true,areAllFieldsSet=true,lenient=false,zone=java.util.SimpleTimeZone[id=GMT-04:00,offset=-14400000,dstSavings=3600000,useDaylight=false,startYear=0,startMode=0,startMonth=0,startDay=0,startDayOfWeek=0,startTime=0,startTimeMode=0,endMode=0,endMonth=0,endDay=0,endDayOfWeek=0,endTime=0,endTimeMode=0],firstDayOfWeek=1,minimalDaysInFirstWeek=1,ERA=1,YEAR=2020,MONTH=2,WEEK_OF_YEAR=11,WEEK_OF_MONTH=2,DAY_OF_MONTH=11,DAY_OF_YEAR=71,DAY_OF_WEEK=4,DAY_OF_WEEK_IN_MONTH=2,AM_PM=0,HOUR=5,HOUR_OF_DAY=5,MINUTE=37,SECOND=17,MILLISECOND=0,ZONE_OFFSET=-14400000,DST_OFFSET=0]
Modification Date=java.util.GregorianCalendar[time=1583919437000,areFieldsSet=true,areAllFieldsSet=true,lenient=false,zone=java.util.SimpleTimeZone[id=GMT-04:00,offset=-14400000,dstSavings=3600000,useDaylight=false,startYear=0,startMode=0,startMonth=0,startDay=0,startDayOfWeek=0,startTime=0,startTimeMode=0,endMode=0,endMonth=0,endDay=0,endDayOfWeek=0,endTime=0,endTimeMode=0],firstDayOfWeek=1,minimalDaysInFirstWeek=1,ERA=1,YEAR=2020,MONTH=2,WEEK_OF_YEAR=11,WEEK_OF_MONTH=2,DAY_OF_MONTH=11,DAY_OF_YEAR=71,DAY_OF_WEEK=4,DAY_OF_WEEK_IN_MONTH=2,AM_PM=0,HOUR=5,HOUR_OF_DAY=5,MINUTE=37,SECOND=17,MILLISECOND=0,ZONE_OFFSET=-14400000,DST_OFFSET=0]
Trapped=null

Context===========>
96 Reference & User Services Quarterly
READERS’ ADVISORY
Laurel Tarulli and Neal Wyatt, Editors
This issue welcomes Neal Wyatt, joining Laurie Tarulli as 
coeditor of the Readers’ Advisory column. With her arrival 
we introduce an occasional series exploring genre and for-
mat. For our first foray, Gillian Speace, Readers’ Advisory 
Librarian, NoveList, provides a guided tour of the reoccur-
ring themes of science fiction, suggesting ways advisors can 
use its perennial concerns to connect readers to the genre’s 
rich backlist as well as keep them immersed in new works—
and worlds. By pairing a classic work to a new title and, con-
versely, a new work to a backlist staple, advisors can make 
full use of the collection, expand the range of titles they keep 
in their proverbial RA back pocket, and help readers access 
the full richness of the genre.—Editor
“People like us, who believe in physics, know that the distinc-
tion between past, present and future is only a stubbornly 
persistent illusion.”
—Albert Einstein
O ne common assumption about science fiction 
(SF) is that it’s about the future. In fact, science 
fiction is about the present: regardless of setting, 
stories in this genre reflect the concerns of the 
era in which they were written. Some anxieties are ever-
green (technological advances, ever-changing social mores), 
while others are more cyclical (authoritarian governments, 
economic instability), but all turn up again and again in dif-
ferent forms as they respond to current events. 
Because of its perennial concerns, readers’ advisory (RA) 
librarians can use classic tropes of SF to help balance read-
ers’ love of the old with their desire for the new, crafting 
a richly textured—and richly resourced—SF RA service. 
Advisors can introduce fans of Arthur C. Clarke to Chinese 
author Liu Cixin or connect a longtime reader of military 
SF to Kameron Hurley’s The Light Brigade. Classic science 
fiction can also help more recent converts get in touch with 
the genre’s roots, thereby creating pathways through the 
collection. Readers of recent “generation ship” stories, such 
as Rivers Solomon’s An Unkindness of Ghosts or Kim Stanley 
Robinson’s Aurora, can be pointed toward Robert Heinlein’s 
Orphans in the Sky, bridging backward to a classic example 
of the trope. With this concept in mind, here are a few key 
classic SF themes with contemporary relevance along with 
suggested titles to pair.
Gillian Speace
Gillian Speace, Readers’ Advisory 
Librarian at NoveList, Durham, NC.
Correspondence to this column should be addressed 
to either Neal Wyatt, Library Journal, contributing 
editor and readers’ advisory columnist; email: nwyatt@
mediasourceinc.com, or Laurel Tarulli, Librarian and 
Information Services Manager, Sacred Heart School 
of Halifax; e-mail: laureltarulli@yahoo.com.
Past is Prologue
Science Fiction and 
Ways of Working
volume 59, issue 2  |  Winter 2019 97
Past is Prologue
LATE CAPITALISM: CYBERPUNK, 
MEGACORPORATIONS, AND MASS 
SURVEILLANCE
Suggested Pairings
Classic to New: Gibson, William. Neuromancer (1984). Sprawl 
trilogy: Older, Malka. Infomocracy (2016). Centenal trilogy
New to Classic: Hart, Rob. The Warehouse (2019): Orwell, 
George. Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949)
The destabilizing effects of the Great Recession have led to 
an increase in SF that examines wealth concentration and 
widening economic disparities that reinforce existing social 
inequalities on a global scale, from Karl Schroeder’s Stealing 
Worlds to Chen Quifan’s Waste Tide to the film Sorry to Bother 
You. Termed “Late Capitalism,” this group of books focuses 
on economic dystopias.1
There’s little doubt that the current bull market for eco-
nomic dystopias reflects anxieties about the contemporary 
economy: a real world in which children are threatened with 
family separation over school lunch debt and in which elec-
tronic surveillance systems monitor every movement made 
by warehouse workers (except for their deaths), does not 
seem so far removed from a fictional one in which individu-
als are owned by shareholders (as in Dani and Eytan Kollin’s 
The Unincorporated Man) or assigned a social credit score 
based on their perceived value to society (as in Yudhanjaya 
Wijeratne’s Numbercaste). However, dystopian fiction built 
around economic systems is not new. The boom-and-bust 
economic cycles of the past, as well as the genre’s long-
standing preoccupation with social inequality, have resulted 
in numerous works of SF in which powerful conglomerates 
dictate nearly all aspects of people’s everyday lives.
A central trope in economic dystopias is the megacorpora-
tion, which has come to be closely associated with cyberpunk, 
an SF subgenre that explores the effects of advanced technol-
ogy on a global capitalist society, often from the perspectives 
of economically marginalized characters. Megacorporations 
in SF frequently represent a merging of government and 
private industry, resulting in interchangeable entities that 
work hand-in-glove to exploit the general population while 
suppressing dissent. Notable examples of the megacorpora-
tion can be found in William Gibson’s Sprawl trilogy, not to 
mention post-cyberpunk works such as Neal Stephenson’s 
Snow Crash. 
As deregulation and privatization are real-world results 
of real-life policy decisions made in the 1970s and 1980s, 
it makes sense that SF from this period engages with these 
issues. However, earlier SF contains numerous examples of 
corporations that become de facto rulers of the world, such as 
the Presteign clan in Alfred Bester’s The Stars My Destination 
(1956) or General Technics in John Brunner’s Stand on Zan-
zibar (1968), not to mention the monolithic multinationals 
found throughout Philip K. Dick’s novels.
Governments, and corporations fulfilling the traditional 
functions of government, require effective messaging to 
convince people to act against their own best interests. The 
difference is one of terminology: governments rely on “pro-
paganda,” megacorporations on “marketing.”
The plot of Frederik Pohl and Cyril M. Kornbluth’s 1952 
satirical novel The Space Merchants revolves around a PR 
campaign—dreamed up by the US government and car-
ried out by an advertising firm—to convince Americans to 
colonize Venus, a miserable hellscape even by the standards 
of a twenty-second-century society struggling with resource 
scarcity due to overpopulation and environmental depreda-
tion resulting from intensive fossil fuel extraction. And yet, 
the general population, despite an ever-declining standard 
of living, appears to be appeased by a plethora of consumer 
goods. A decade later, J.G. Ballard’s short story “The Sub-
liminal Man” explores consumerism and its dependence on 
artificially generated needs reinforced by advertising.
Advertising, of course, does not exist without mass 
media. That may be part of the reason that consumer tech-
nology is an ongoing source of anxiety in SF (consider the 
focus on our relationships with mobile devices and media in 
Netflix’s Black Mirror SF anthology series). From the two-way 
“telescreens” of George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four to the 
wearable “SeeChange cameras” of Dave Eggers’s The Circle, 
dystopian SF frequently depicts communication technologies 
as tools of authoritarian regimes, spreading propaganda and 
misinformation while conducting mass surveillance. The 
technologies in question may change (from television to the 
internet), as might the exact formulation of threat (corporato-
cracy replaces totalitarianism as the evil regime du jour), but 
the result—violations of basic human rights—is the same.
The interplay of technology, government, and media 
has taken on renewed relevance in the past two decades, 
as the twenty-first century has been shaped by events such 
as 9/11, the resulting “War on Terror,” and the surveillance 
state that has arisen in response, aided and abetted by tech-
nology companies that remain largely unaccountable. Cory 
Doctorow’s Little Brother, Nick Harkaway’s Gnomon, and Paul 
J. McAuley’s Whole Wide World are just a handful of books 
that explore these issues.
From Malka Older’s Centenal cycle (beginning with Info-
mocracy) to the HBO television series Westworld, today’s SF is 
deeply concerned with the rise of Big Data and its weapon-
ization by megacorporations, which profit from violating the 
privacy of billions and harvesting their personal information. 
And what Big Data is to twenty-first-century SF, the early 
internet was to cyberpunk: these contemporary works build 
upon the foundations laid by Gibson et al. and expand on the 
themes of bleeding edge technology, rising social inequality, 
and the corrosive effects of global capitalism.
Meanwhile, the nascent online culture first depicted in 
cyberpunk has matured, yet its vision of a free and open soci-
ety made possible by the web has been replaced by a reality in 
which technology imprisons rather than liberates and in which 
a handful of wealthy and thus powerful individuals profit at 
98 Reference & User Services Quarterly
READERS’ ADVISORY
the expense of everyone else. From Lauren Beukes’s Moxyland 
to Max Barry’s Jennifer Government, numerous contemporary 
SF novels examine the conflicts that arise from technologies 
underpinning both systems of social credit and social control. 
ALIENS: FIRST CONTACT AND INVASION
Suggested Pairings
Classic to New: Heinlein, Robert. The Puppet Masters (1951): 
Thompson, Tade. Rosewater (2016). Wormwood trilogy
New to Classic: Liu, Cixin. The Three-Body Problem (2008). 
Remembrance of Earth’s Past: Clarke, Arthur. C. Childhood’s 
End (1953)
Extraterrestrials represent the ultimate “other,” regardless 
of form (humanoid or nonhumanoid) or intent (benign, 
malign, or indifferent to humankind). As such, their pres-
ence in SF encourages us to examine what we are as well as 
what we are not. Stories about aliens prompt us to reflect 
on human nature and to consider our identity and values, 
whether individually or collectively. Less positively, they can 
also betray our anxieties about outsiders. Just as anxieties 
about foreign peoples and nations are cyclical, so, too, can 
readers of contemporary alien encounter tales find titles of 
interest in classic SF.
Stories about aliens fall into two broad categories: alien 
invasions and first-contact stories. Although these themes 
can overlap, alien invasion stories typically focus on con-
flict between humans and aliens, while first-contact sto-
ries, which take a more anthropological view of encounters 
between humans and extraterrestrial civilizations, tend to 
focus on diplomatic relations.
H. G. Wells’s 1898 novel The War of the Worlds introduced 
the alien invasion trope to literature. Wells, who also helped 
to lay the foundations of military SF with “The War in the 
Air,” drew on so-called “invasion literature” of the period to 
explore the concept of invaders from space.2 These narratives 
rise and fall in popularity and, to some extent, reflect the 
anxieties of the era in which they were written: Edgar Rice 
Burroughs’s 1925 novel, The Moon Men, was influenced by the 
Red Scare of the post-World War I period, and the Cold War 
would produce a number of alien invasion narratives involv-
ing covert infiltration of the human body and mind-control, 
notably Robert Heinlein’s 1951 novel The Puppet Masters.
First contact in the modern sense came later. One of the 
earliest examples of this theme can be found in Murray Lein-
ster’s short novel First Contact (1945), which is among the 
first to describe a universal translation device (a perennial 
interest of SF creators and fans, not to mention technology 
companies). First contact stories are often concerned with 
communication as a means of building interspecies trust, 
although the degree to which this is considered possible or 
even desirable varies greatly within the genre.
On one end of the spectrum is the Star Trek franchise 
(1966–present), in which peaceful coexistence between dif-
ferent interstellar cultures is both possible and achievable; 
on the other is Stanislaw Lem’s Solaris (1961), which argues 
that the limitations of human bodies and minds renders us 
incapable of understanding an extraterrestrial intelligence. 
Somewhere in the middle are stories ranging from China 
Mieville’s Embassytown to James Cambias’s A Darkling Sea to 
Ted Chiang’s “Story of Your Life,” suggesting that communi-
cation is possible, but that differences in values or worldview 
may preclude true understanding.
One particularly interesting development in recent SF 
is Afrofuturist alien invasion tales set in regions grappling 
with historical legacies of colonialism. Cadwell Turnbull’s 
The Lesson unfolds on St. Thomas in the US Virgin Islands, 
which the alien Ynaa have chosen as their base of opera-
tions. Although the Ynaa insist that they mean no harm to 
the locals, actions speak louder than words as they react to 
minor provocations with extreme force. Such incidents echo 
the many historical examples of imperial powers answering 
native resistance, perceived or actual, with brutal reprisals 
in the name of peacekeeping.
Both Nnedi Okorafor’s Lagoon and Tade Thompson’s 
Wormwood trilogy are set in Nigeria, the former in a vibrant 
near-future Lagos, the latter in the fictional city of Rosewa-
ter, which encircles an alien biodome. Despite benevolent 
intentions, the aliens of Lagoon—self-described “agents of 
change”—arguably do more harm than good by imposing 
their values on the human communities they encounter. The 
motives of Rosewater’s aliens are murkier, yet their presence 
feels familiar to Nigerian onlookers who are “unimpressed, 
even in our knowledge that it is the most significant event 
in Earth’s history. We’ve seen colonizers before, and they are 
similar, whether intercontinental or interplanetary.”
Unlike earlier alien invasion narratives, which cast extra-
terrestrials as the ultimate “foreign menace” threatening 
(white) Earthlings and their way of life, recent explorations 
of this theme draw explicit parallels between space invaders 
and European imperialists, who literally invade the spaces of 
people of color and use their “superior” understanding and 
“advanced” technologies to reshape these spaces to suit the 
invaders’ needs.
THE POSTHUMAN FUTURE: UPLIFT, AI, AND 
CYBORGS
Suggested Pairings
Classic to New: Asimov, Isaac. I, Robot (1950): Wilson, Daniel. 
Guardian Angels and Other Monsters (2018)
New to Classic: Bodard, Aliette de. “The Shipmaker” and 
“The Waiting Stars.” Collected in Of Wars, and Memories, and 
Starlight (2019): McCaffrey, Anne. The Ship Who Sang (1969)
volume 59, issue 2  |  Winter 2019 99
Past is Prologue
One enduring source of speculation in SF is posthumanism, 
which asks not “What becomes of us?” but “What do we 
become?” Often (but not always) set in the distant future, 
posthuman SF imagines how our species might change over 
time, whether through evolution or technological interven-
tion. Although the methods may differ, the outcome is the 
same: at some point, by some means, we become something 
else.
While the theme of posthumanism in SF encompasses 
numerous avenues of potential transformation, the major-
ity of contemporary posthuman SF falls into two categories: 
human-like computers and computer-like humans. The 
former includes stories about artificial intelligence (AI) and 
the technological singularity; the latter includes stories about 
cyborgs and biotechnology. These themes are particularly 
relevant today thanks to concurrent advances in medical and 
computing technology, which echoes similar advances in the 
postwar era of the mid-twentieth century. Once again, this 
presents an opportunity for the RA librarian to draw con-
nections between classic and contemporary works touching 
on these themes.
Human-like computers appear in the genre first. While 
mechanical beings can be found in the literature of classical 
antiquity, our familiar word robot (derived from the Czech 
word robota, or “serf labor”) makes its first appearance in 
playwright Karel ?apek’s 1920 drama, R.U.R., in which 
manufactured people revolt against their human enslavers, 
resulting in the near-extermination of the human species. 
Although ?apek introduced the ever-popular theme of robot 
uprisings to SF, Russian-American SF author Isaac Asimov 
made equally important contributions to AI-themed SF 
through his short story collection I, Robot.3 Asimov’s robot 
stories take the basic premise of the mechanical servant 
and use it to explore philosophical issues such as morality 
or free will, or social ones such as bigotry and discrimina-
tion. Artificial beings as diverse as Star Wars’s R2-D2, Data 
from Star Trek: The Next Generation, and even Futurama’s 
cigar-chomping robot Bender owe their existence to Asimov. 
Of course, AI is not necessarily benign. SF author Vernor 
Vinge introduced the idea of the technological singularity in 
his essay, “The Coming Technological Singularity: How to 
Survive in the Post-Human Era.”4 Drawing on British math-
ematician I.J. Good’s concept of an “intelligence explosion,” 
Vinge describes the hypothetical point at which accelerating 
technological progress leads to the creation of “entities with 
greater than human intelligence.” At which point, Vinge 
suggests, humans will become obsolete. Is obsolescence 
the same as extinction? Will machines destroy humans or 
enslave them? Or is there even a role for humans in a posthu-
man world? These are just some of the questions AI-themed 
SF explores.
Today, advances in AI, anxiety about automation, and 
expanding conceptions of identity have contributed to a 
resurgence of SF involving robots. Such stories explore 
what it means to be human on both a personal level (What 
is gender? How do our physical bodies, their abilities and 
limitations, shape our lived experiences?) and a political one 
(What basic rights are individuals or certain groups entitled 
to? Who decides?) 
Similar concerns about advances in computing are 
reflected in fiction from the dawn of the computer age. In 
both the film and novel versions of 2001: A Space Odyssey, the 
supercomputer HAL 9000 malfunctions and attempts to kill 
an entire spaceship crew. The Allied Mastercomputer (“AM”) 
of Harlan Ellison’s “I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream” 
(1966) is an AI with an unquenchable thirst for revenge; 
having brought about humanity’s near-extinction, it keeps 
five humans captive to torture them. 
However, for every chilling “rise of the machines” tale, 
such as Daniel Wilson’s Robopocalypse or Todd McAulty’s The 
Robots of Gotham, there are thought-provoking novels featur-
ing sympathetic synthetic lifeforms navigating an unsympa-
thetic world, such as Becky Chambers’s A Close and Common 
Orbit or Martha Wells’s All Systems Red.
By contrast, stories about computer-like humans focus 
on human evolution as opposed to human obsolescence. 
Charles Stross’s 2005 novel Accelerando traces the shift 
from human to posthuman by following three successive 
generations of the same family before, during, and after the 
Singularity, while Greg Egan’s Diaspora shows a trifurcated 
thirtieth-century posthuman humanity comprised of “flesh-
ers” (i.e., normal humans), Gleisner robots (human brains 
embodied in machines), and “polises” (supercomputers con-
taining digital copies of billions of humans).
Although there is no shortage of depictions of societ-
ies transformed by cybernetic technology, many SF stories 
about computer-like humans focus on individual cyborgs, 
or augmented humans whose capabilities are enhanced or 
extended by technology. Early cyborgs represented medical 
interventions designed to restore lost function. C.L. Moore’s 
“No Woman Born” (1941) introduces Deirdre, a popular 
entertainer whose brain is implanted in a faceless mechanical 
body following a tragic accident. Similarly, the plot of Anne 
McCaffrey’s 1969 novel The Ship Who Sang centers around 
humans with severe birth defects whose disembodied brains 
are harnessed to power starships. Although the novel will 
strike contemporary readers as highly problematic in its 
depiction of disabled people, it represents an influential 
treatment of the cyborg theme. The mind-ships of Aliette 
de Bodard’s Xuya Universe can be read as a direct response 
to McCaffrey’s brainships, employing a now-familiar trope 
to examine issues such as consent and cultural relativism.
The cyborg theme in SF encompasses everything from 
adaptive technologies (to facilitate bodily autonomy) to tech-
nological enhancements (to extend physical capabilities) 
to technological immortality (to cheat death). However, as 
advances in technology transform science fiction into science 
fact, the focus of these stories shift towards achievements 
still beyond our grasp: namely, immortality. Neal Stephen-
son’s Fall: Or, Dodge in Hell chronicles the digital afterlife of a 
deceased tech mogul whose brain is scanned and uploaded 
to the cloud, while in Richard K. Morgan’s Altered Carbon 
100 Reference & User Services Quarterly
READERS’ ADVISORY
every person has a “cortical stack” (digital copy of them-
selves) that can be “resleeved” in a new body. Both works 
owe a great debt to Robert Sheckley’s 1958 novel Immortality, 
Inc., which follows the misadventures of a wealthy deceased 
man who is revived in a future society where death is incon-
sequential, due to the ability to download one’s conscious-
ness into a new body. Although this novel is not the first to 
explore mind uploads as a means of cheating death, it does 
introduce a notable feature of technological immortality in 
SF, namely, that it depends on one’s resources: wealthy indi-
viduals can pay to extend their lifespan indefinitely, while 
others cannot. 
Sheckley’s observation that wealth buys health has strong 
echoes in contemporary SF, which expresses ambivalence 
about scientific breakthroughs, particularly in biotechnology 
and biomedical engineering, stemming from awareness that 
not everyone’s life will be improved by such advances. Books 
such as Annalee Newitz’s Autonomous and Laura Lam’s False 
Hearts explore scenarios in which the direct benefits of sci-
entific progress are neither equitably distributed nor acces-
sible to all who need them. In biopunk novels such as Paul 
J. McAuley’s Fairyland (1995), Paolo Bacigalupi’s The Windup 
Girl (2008), and Jeff VanderMeer’s Borne (2017), biotechnol-
ogy even contributes to the creation of sentient beings that 
lack the rights and protections afforded to humans. 
THE END TIMES: CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE 
DYING EARTH
Suggested Pairings
Classic to New: Ballard, J.G. The Drowned World (1962): Rob-
inson, Kim Stanley. New York 2140 (2017)
New to Classic: Atwood, Margaret. The Year of the Flood 
(2009). MaddAddam trilogy: Butler, Octavia. Parable of the 
Talents (1998). Earthseed series
The existential threat posed by climate change is ever-pres-
ent in SF, whether as a driver of events or, increasingly, as a 
background element. Author Annalee Newitz has observed 
that “any story about the future that’s at least a century out 
has to include a dramatic picture of climate change.”5 Cli-
mate change, in other words, is the new normal. Climate 
fiction, sometimes called “cli-fi,” imagines the not-so-distant 
future of Earth and its endangered inhabitants as they strug-
gle to survive and adapt to dramatic environmental changes, 
as in Paolo Bacigalupi’s The Water Knife, Chang-rae Lee’s On 
a Full Sea, or Omar El Akkad’s American War. Accompany-
ing this trend is a rise in dystopian fiction in which current 
problems lead to unrest and societal breakdown, or even 
human extinction.
Published in 1962, J.G. Ballard’s The Drowned World (and 
its companion novel, The Drought) offers one of the earliest 
realistic fictional explorations of a world ravaged by climate 
change. Although it explicitly cites the greenhouse effect 
and the melting of the polar ice caps as catalysts for wide-
spread environmental devastation, the novel attributes the 
destruction to natural disaster rather than human activity. 
Although less common than cataclysmic climate change, 
human-induced climate change is not exactly rare in SF. 
Writers tended to depict it as the result of nuclear war 
until the 1970s, a period of heightened environmental con-
sciousness that saw the publication of novels such as John 
Brunner’s The Sheep Look Up (1972), which sees a character 
arrested for trying to obtain air-pollution data; Kate Wil-
helm’s Where the Sweet Birds Sing (“As soon as man stopped 
adding his megatons of filth into the atmosphere . . . [it] had 
reverted to what it must have been long ago”); and Arthur 
Herzog’s Heat (1977).
Arguably more important than scientifically accurate 
fictional depictions of anthropogenic climate change are 
culturally and politically accurate fictional depictions, such 
as Octavia Butler’s Parable of the Sower (1993), in which 
global warming exacerbates widespread societal break-
down, and Kim Stanley Robinson’s Science in the Capitol 
trilogy (2004–07), which focuses on scientists’ efforts to 
avert a slow-motion climate catastrophe stalling in the face 
of human complacency and a lack of political will.
A clear forerunner of climate fiction is the “dying Earth” 
novel, which takes its name from Jack Vance’s 1950 short 
story collection The Dying Earth about a far-future world in 
which the sun has reached the end of its lifespan. Blending 
SF and fantasy, Vance’s book spawned an entire subgenre, 
reaching its apotheosis with the publication of Gene Wolfe’s 
science fantasy epic series Book of the New Sun. Unlike the 
swift catastrophes of most apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic 
fiction, where a single asteroid or nuclear bomb ends human 
civilization in a flash, dying Earth stories resemble the 
“slow-pocalypses” of climate fiction, in which a dwindling 
human population survives in the ruins of civilization. Tone 
is arguably more important than setting: the lyrical, elegiac 
tone that permeates dying earth novels can be seen in non-
climate apocalyptic fiction such as Emily St. John Mandel’s 
Station Eleven. Novels that take a dying Earth approach to 
climate change include Margaret Atwood’s MaddAddam tril-
ogy (beginning with Oryx and Crake), Claire Vaye Watkins’s 
Gold Fame Citrus, and Edan Lepucki’s California.
One notable difference is that in the dying Earth sub-
genre, survivors are more likely to respond to their situa-
tion with resignation, whereas in modern climate fiction 
the emphasis is on surviving, adapting, and (where possible) 
rebuilding. Both Kim Stanley Robinson’s New York 2140 
and Alex di Francesco’s All City take place in a submerged 
twenty-first-century New York City and feature a diverse cast 
of characters refashioning society to reflect the new world 
order. L.X. Beckett’s Gamechanger envisions a future in which 
global cooperation leads to an eventual reversal of the effects 
of climate change and a more sustainable society. 
volume 59, issue 2  |  Winter 2019 101
Past is Prologue
TIME TRAVEL: THE DARKEST TIMELINE
Suggested Pairings
Classic to New: Williamson, Jack. The Legion of Time (1952): 
Newitz, Annalee. The Future of Another Timeline (2019)
New to Classic: Crouch, Blake. Recursion (2019): Bradbury, 
Ray “A Sound of Thunder” (1952)
Science fiction excels in extrapolating the effects of small 
changes in society, so it’s no wonder the theme of time travel 
is a perennial favorite in the genre. Most of the major time 
travel tropes were laid down during the so-called Golden 
Age of SF. Ray Bradbury’s “A Sound of Thunder” (1952) was 
among the first to explore the unintended consequences (the 
“ripple effects”) of time travel to the past, while novels such 
as Poul Anderson’s Time Patrol series (1955–95) and Isaac 
Asimov’s The End of Eternity (1955) introduce the concept 
of time police, entities tasked with enforcing the rules of 
causality to ensure the continued existence of the “correct” 
timeline. 
Of course, the notion of a correct timeline reflects a desire 
to maintain the status quo by safeguarding the systems 
that are the source of a dominant group’s power. Recently, 
the adage “history is written by the victors” seems apropos 
as “change wars” make their way back into SF for the first 
time in decades. Fought across time, change wars weapon-
ize time travel to ensure the existence of one timeline over 
another; typical tactics include manipulating causality or 
laying paradoxes like landmines. Fans of Doctor Who will 
recognize this trope.
The term is derived from Fritz Leiber’s Change Wars 
series, which unfolds against the backdrop of a temporal war 
called “The Big Time” in which two factions battle for control 
of the timeline. However, the groundwork for this concept 
was laid by Jack Williamson’s earlier Legion of Time books, 
about a squad of time traveling warriors deployed to win a 
key battle in a time war.
As this theme evolves, the reasons for change wars soon 
shift from pragmatic goals of self-preservation to ideological 
aims: in Poul Anderson’s Corridors of Time (1966), opponents 
represent “two ways of thought and life—of being,” Stories 
that revolve around competing versions of reality resonate 
deeply with contemporary readers living in a polarized soci-
ety where it often seems like each side is battling not only for 
victory but for the extermination of their opponents. Annalee 
Newitz’s The Future of Another Timeline casts human history 
as a kind of Wikipedia page that can be edited by time travel-
ers and pits a coalition of feminist activists against a regres-
sive group of male chauvinists in an ongoing campaign to 
reshape societal rules and norms.
Amal El-Mohtar and Max Gladstone’s lyrical epistolary 
novel This is How You Lose the Time War introduces covert 
operatives representing rival timelines, framing it (à la Cor-
ridors of Time, above) as a winner-take-all battle between a 
technologically advanced future and a more pastoral one. 
Unusually for books of this type, the novel advocates love 
over war, emphasizing the protagonists’ creative attempts to 
break down ideological barriers and reach across a divide 
that seems impossible to bridge.
A related time-travel theme concerns whose stories are 
heard and whose are believed. In a world of “fake news” 
and “alternative facts,” reality can be difficult to discern 
(especially with time travel in the mix). Driving the plot of 
Dexter Palmer’s Version Control is one woman’s nagging sense 
that something is amiss in her world—the result of scien-
tists testing a time machine, which causes subtle changes 
to reality. The main character experiences this as “a subtle 
wrongness—not within herself, but in the world.” Despite 
the correctness of her perception, her concerns are dismissed 
because she herself is not a scientist and because of her past 
struggles with alcohol abuse.
Similarly, Blake Crouch’s Recursion introduces False 
Memory Syndrome (FMS), a psychiatric condition that 
results in people having “two sets of memories. One true, 
one false.” Those living with FMS have vivid memories of 
lives they have not lived, full of loved ones who may or may 
not exist. In fact, this condition turns out to be a side effect 
of other people recklessly changing the past without con-
sidering the repercussions. The result is a sort of temporal 
gaslighting, where one’s sanity—or entire existence—may be 
collateral damage to another person’s tinkering with history.
A BRIGHTER FUTURE?
Suggested Pairings
Classic to New: Ellison, Harlan (ed.) Dangerous Visions (1967): 
Imarisha, Walidah and adrienne marie brown (eds.) Octavia’s 
Brood: Science Fiction from Social Justice Movements (2015) 
New to Classic: Chambers, Becky. Record of a Spaceborn Few 
(2018). Wayfarer series: White, James. Hospital Station (1962). 
Sector General series
And yet, not everything is doom and gloom. A welcome 
recent trend in the genre is a more hopeful SF that looks 
both outward, with the goal of imagining our future among 
the stars, and inward, with the goal of creating a more just 
and inclusive human society here on Earth.
For every SF novel that contemplates humanity’s prob-
able extinction, another looks beyond the bounds of Earth 
to imagine humanity’s future among the stars. Stories of 
space exploration and planetary colonization have under-
gone something of a resurgence of late, as authors use outer 
space as the setting for a wide variety of galaxy-spanning 
societies, from Karen Lord’s The Best of All Possible Worlds to 
Becky Chambers’s Wayfarer series (beginning with The Long 
Way to a Small Angry Planet) to Nathan Lowell’s Golden Age 
of the Solar Clipper books. The spacefaring societies depicted 
102 Reference & User Services Quarterly
READERS’ ADVISORY
in these books are not perfect, but they are largely peaceful 
ones full of moral characters trying to do the right thing.
Hopeful SF has a long and storied history. Television’s 
Star Trek: The Original Series is well known for its idealism, 
but it’s by no means the only work of SF that presents an 
optimistic view of the future. James White’s Sector General 
novels (1962–99), about a hospital space station staffed by 
medical personnel both human and alien, offers uplifting 
accounts of interspecies cooperation; its diverse (at least, on 
the alien side; humans are mostly male and entirely white) 
cast works together to save lives, not destroy them. Although 
it lacks Sector General’s pacifist worldview, Lois McMaster 
Bujold’s Vorkosigan saga also features characters whose 
moral integrity drives their actions.
Science fiction has an unfortunate reputation for being 
a genre written for and by white men. While this percep-
tion is not totally inaccurate, SF has also historically been 
more diverse than people give it credit for. Perhaps the most 
enduring legacy of New Wave SF of the 1960s and 70s is 
its success in introducing greater diversity to SF. Although 
women had been making substantial contributions to SF 
since the genre’s earliest days, writers and editors including 
Ursula K. Le Guin, Joanna Russ, and Judith Merril pioneered 
an explicitly feminist SF that explored contemporary social 
issues through a speculative lens. Other forms of diversity 
are still a work in progress. While there is a rich tradition of 
African American speculative fiction dating back (at least) 
to W.E.B. Du Bois’s “The Comet,” there is less evidence for a 
community of black writers in the genre during this period.6 
Similarly, there have always been LGBTQIA individuals 
within the ranks of SF writers, such as Arthur C. Clarke, 
but in the pre-Stonewall era there was no real community 
to speak of. As a black, gay writer of speculative fiction, 
Samuel R. Delany occupied a singular position in the field, 
producing groundbreaking SF in which he drew on personal 
experience to explore issues of race, gender, and sexuality 
(among others) at a time when this was not familiar terri-
tory for the genre.
Nevertheless, the project of creating an inclusive body 
of SF continues, with recent anthologies such as A People’s 
Future of the United States, edited by Victor LaValle and John 
Joseph Adams, and Octavia’s Brood: Science Fiction from Social 
Justice Movements, edited by Walidah Imarisha and adrienne 
marie brown) collecting SF stories from diverse groups of 
contributors that approach speculative fiction as a form of 
activism. Meanwhile, SF attracts increasing numbers of tal-
ented writers from traditionally underrepresented groups, 
including women writers, writers of color, LGBTQIA writers, 
and international writers whose works are translated and 
read by an increasingly global audience. Better yet, the call 
for greater inclusivity and diversity of viewpoints in SF has 
largely come from fans, who perhaps recognize that big exis-
tential problems require the bright ideas of as many minds 
as possible. 
Ultimately, in SF, everything old is new again (and again 
and again). For this reason, it’s crucial to look both to the 
past and the present to understand the genre’s appeal and 
to help fans navigate the universe of SF. Hopefully, these 
recommendations will offer useful starting points for intro-
ducing new and classic titles to SF readers seeking to expand 
their horizons.
References and Notes
1. Unlike most of the Frankfurt School’s contributions to intellec-
tual discourse, the phrase “late capitalism” has achieved some-
thing like “meme” status. Popularized by Fredric Jameson in 
his influential book Postmodernism, or The Cultural Logic of Late 
Capitalism, the term’s meaning has shifted since its introduction, 
from describing the transformation of culture into commod-
ity to what Annie Lowrey, writing for the Atlantic, describes 
as a “catchall phrase for the indignities and absurdities of our 
contemporary economy, with its yawning inequality and super-
powered corporations and shrinking middle class.” See Annie 
Lowrey, “Why The Phrase ‘Late Capitalism’ Is Suddenly Every-
where,” The Atlantic, May 1, 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com 
/business/archive/2017/05/late-capitalism/524943/.
2. Such as “The Battle of Dorking,” a rather prescient 1871 short 
story that imagined an invasion of Britain by a technologically 
advanced Germany. See Tom Reiss, “Imagining the Worst,” The 
New Yorker, Nov. 20, 2005, https://www.newyorker.com/maga 
zine/2005/11/28/imagining-the-worst
3. The rules, first laid out in Asimov’s 1942 short story “Run-
around,” are as follows: First Law: A robot may not injure a human 
being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. 
Second Law: A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings 
except where such orders would conflict with the First Law. Third 
Law: A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection 
does not conflict with the First or Second Laws. Later, Asimov would 
append a zeroth law: “Zeroth” Law: A robot may not harm human-
ity, or, by inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.
4. Vernor Vinge, “The Coming Technological Singularity: How to 
Survive in the Post-Human Era,” VISION-21 Symposium, March 
30–31, 1993, https://edoras.sdsu.edu/~vinge/misc/singularity 
.html.
5. Amy Brady, “In ‘Autonomous,’ Climate Change is a Disease Vec-
tor,” Chicago Review of Books, Sept. 28, 2019, https://chireviewof 
books.com/2017/09/28/autonomous-annalee-newitz-interview/.
6. See Nisi Shawl’s superb essay “A Crash Course in the History of 
Black Science Fiction,” Nisi Shawl, 2018, http://www.nisishawl 
.com/CCHBSF.html.
Copyright of Reference & User Services Quarterly is the property of American Library
Association and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a
listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.
