Title:
Backward Design

Abstract:
By incorporating backward design principles when designing 
library instruction, the librarian can ensure that instruction 
is student-focused and that each lesson, whether it is a one-
shot workshop, an online module, or a full for-credit infor-
mation literacy course, meaningfully contributes toward the 
achievement of information literacy learning outcomes as well 
as course, departmental, and university learning objectives. 
Backward design’s focus on alignment and assessment allows 
the librarian to not only improve the quality of instruction 
for current students, but also helps the librarian demonstrate 
value and impact to instructors and administrators, lending 
itself as a powerful advocacy tool for new instructional oppor-
tunities. In addition, integrating backward design processes 
with an instructional design model and reflecting on librar-
ian roles during the design, implementation, and assessment 
of library instruction can help enhance the value of thinking 

----------------------
Subtitles:
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
 BACKWARD DESIGN 
 INTRODUCTION TO THE FINK BACKWARD 
DESIGN PROCESS 
 APPLICATION OF THE BACKWARD DESIGN 
PROCESS 
 CONCLUSION 


Text:
----------------------
Sarah LeMire, Editor
Library instruction sessions, courses, and programs ben-
efit from a strategic and intentional instructional design 
approach. This type of approach can provide a framework for 
librarian discussions with collaborators, such as faculty or 
other stakeholders, and facilitate librarians’ advocacy efforts 
for information literacy instruction in the curriculum. But 
in the midst of busy schedules and competing responsibili-
ties, it can be difficult to find time and a strategy that works 
well for library instructional contexts. This column shares 
an instructional design strategy adopted by librarians to add 
intentionality to their instruction. This backward design 
instructional design process has proven to be an invaluable 
tool for designing instructional contexts ranging from one-
shots to tutorials to semester-length courses.—Editor
A n increased focus on accountability and assess-
ment is driving changes in higher education. In 
addition, changing student populations require 
new approaches to teaching, curriculum design, 
and assessment. L. Dee Fink, in his book Creating Significant 
Learning Experiences: An Integrated Approach to Designing Col-
lege Courses, contends that “faculty knowledge about course 
design is the most significant bottleneck to better teaching 
and learning in higher education.”1 Therefore, focusing on 
how instructors design their courses, and not just on how 
they teach, should be a high priority when trying to improve 
teaching. However, often library instruction places more 
effort into showcasing library databases and information 
literacy teaching techniques and less into designing quality 
library instruction. Therefore, learning instructional design 
skills will become more important as librarians continue 
to strive to integrate the ACRL Framework for Information 
Literacy into their teaching practice. Instructional design 
skills using backward design methods can help librarians 
design instruction. Marrying instructional design models 
and frameworks with tools to help guide librarianship prac-
tice can help librarians adjust to changing times.
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Backward design is a process of planning instruction that 
begins by reflecting about the end of the course and iden-
tifying first the learning outcomes you hope students will 
achieve. Then you move backward to design the course 
components aligned to these outcomes that will help attain 
the teaching objectives. This process, embedded in several 
course design models, helps to ensure that you are actually 
Sarah LeMire, Editor
Library instruction sessions, courses, and programs ben-
efit from a strategic and intentional instructional design 
approach. This type of approach can provide a framework for 
librarian discussions with collaborators, such as faculty or 
other stakeholders, and facilitate librarians’ advocacy efforts 
for information literacy instruction in the curriculum. But 
in the midst of busy schedules and competing responsibili-
ties, it can be difficult to find time and a strategy that works 
well for library instructional contexts. This column shares 
an instructional design strategy adopted by librarians to add 
intentionality to their instruction. This backward design 
instructional design process has proven to be an invaluable 
tool for designing instructional contexts ranging from one-
shots to tutorials to semester-length courses.—Editor
A n increased focus on accountability and assess-
ment is driving changes in higher education. In 
addition, changing student populations require 
new approaches to teaching, curriculum design, 
and assessment. L. Dee Fink, in his book Creating Significant 
Learning Experiences: An Integrated Approach to Designing Col-
lege Courses, contends that “faculty knowledge about course 
design is the most significant bottleneck to better teaching 
and learning in higher education.”1 Therefore, focusing on 
how instructors design their courses, and not just on how 
they teach, should be a high priority when trying to improve 
teaching. However, often library instruction places more 
effort into showcasing library databases and information 
literacy teaching techniques and less into designing quality 
library instruction. Therefore, learning instructional design 
skills will become more important as librarians continue 
to strive to integrate the ACRL Framework for Information 
Literacy into their teaching practice. Instructional design 
skills using backward design methods can help librarians 
design instruction. Marrying instructional design models 
and frameworks with tools to help guide librarianship prac-
tice can help librarians adjust to changing times.
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Backward design is a process of planning instruction that 
begins by reflecting about the end of the course and iden-
tifying first the learning outcomes you hope students will 
achieve. Then you move backward to design the course 
components aligned to these outcomes that will help attain 
the teaching objectives. This process, embedded in several 
course design models, helps to ensure that you are actually 
teaching and measuring the learning outcomes you have 
established.2 Although many librarians are familiar with the 
work of Wiggins and McTighe due to the implementation of 
the ACRL Framework, which references their work,3 librar-
ians have also begun to experiment with Fink’s backward 
design process.4 The visual nature of the alignment grid 
(appendix A), a backward design process tool, provides a 
representation of how the instructional plan can help iden-
tify gaps and redundancies during the instructional plan-
ning process. 
Since this model focuses on student learning outcomes, 
and not on what the instructor is teaching, it is grounded 
in student-centered learning principles.5 Evidence from 
the educational literature suggests that a student-centered 
approach engages students in the learning process.6 Bonwell 
and Eison contend that designing instruction with active and 
student-centered learning components helps students con-
nect theory to practice, reflect on their own learning, and 
construct new knowledge as they build upon prior knowl-
edge and experience.7
As more focus is placed on demonstrating the value of 
academic libraries and how libraries impact student success, 
the literature on student-centered teaching is becoming even 
more integrated with the library science literature.8 In addi-
tion, an increased demand for assessment and evaluation 
due to financial constraints and accreditation is also driv-
ing change in how academic libraries demonstrate value to 
the campus community. This will require new instructional 
design and assessment initiatives as well as more efficient 
and effective library instruction models.9 These changes 
related to library value also mandate a shift in rethink-
ing librarian roles and the need for instructional design, 
assessment, and evaluation.10 Professional development in 
data management and data analysis for assessment is also 
needed if academic libraries are to adequately contribute to 
university missions and student success.11 Learning new 
instructional design strategies could help equip librarians 
for this new quality-focused instructional context in higher 
education.
BACKWARD DESIGN 
The backward design process is an instructional design 
strategy that is particularly useful for librarians because 
it can be easily applied in a variety of instructional situa-
tions, such as for individual lessons, a series of embedded 
library sessions, or an entire information literacy course. 
Because the backward design planning process aligns 
learning outcomes, learning activities, and assessment, 
it helps librarians ensure that instruction is directly sup-
porting learning outcomes, regardless of the instructional 
context. Backward design can help librarians manage and 
prioritize their time, especially in one-shot instruction, 
when librarians commonly have as little as fifty minutes to 
make an impact. Backward design forces the librarian to 
plan out lessons in advance, focusing not on what tools or 
skills are to be covered but rather on what learning will be 
achieved. This process helps the librarian use time wisely 
by honing in on the most impactful activities to achieve 
the identified learning outcomes. It makes one’s rationale 
visible to ensure that the designed activities are truly sup-
porting learning goals and also helps identify potential 
gaps or redundancies in lesson planning. The backward 
design process is also helpful in longer-term instructional 
scenarios, including instruction delivered across multiple 
sections, sessions, or modalities. Whether a librarian is 
teaching a one-shot workshop or a for-credit information 
literacy course, the principles of backward design will help 
the librarian ensure that their teaching is directly aligned 
to student learning outcomes. 
The backward design process can also help librarians 
communicate the value of information literacy instruction 
to internal and external stakeholders. Backward design pro-
duces an artifact clearly delineating the relationship between 
activities and learning outcomes. By sharing the backward 
design alignment grid with library instruction coordina-
tors, collaborating instructors, and students, librarians can 
help these stakeholders understand the purpose of library 
activities and the terminal learning objectives. For example, 
librarians can use the alignment grid to support efforts to 
make library instruction programs more programmatic and 
intentional. Because it clearly delineates the outcomes and 
activities involved in an instructional opportunity, librarians 
can use the alignment grid to map instructional outcomes 
across an instruction program to identify gaps and points 
of overlap and to support efforts to advocate for additional 
instruction time. The librarian can adapt the alignment 
grid to include course outcomes or department/program 
outcomes, creating a document that maps the direct rela-
tionship between information literacy learning outcomes 
and the instructor’s own objectives. Because assessment is 
a key element of the alignment grid, the librarian can use 
the grid to demonstrate how incorporating information 
literacy instruction into a course will not only help instruc-
tors meet their course learning outcomes but will also help 
them meet department and administrative mandates. A 
successfully-executed alignment grid can be a powerful tool 
when advocating for information literacy integration into a 
course because it can very clearly articulate how the infor-
mation literacy instruction directly supports the course and 
or departmental learning outcomes. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE FINK BACKWARD 
DESIGN PROCESS 
The backward design process based on Fink’s course design 
model can be broken down into a three-step process that 
guides the librarian from large-scale, long-term thinking 
down to the granularity of learning activities and classroom 
equipment. By following these three steps, the librarian 
can design instruction that will directly contribute toward 
achieving those long-term student learning goals.
Step 1: Dream Exercise 
The Dream Exercise is the first step of the backward design 
process, and its function is to orient the instructor’s per-
spective to the long-term. It asks instructors to imagine a 
conversation with their students a year or two into the future 
and then to consider what they would want their students to 
know, be, or be able to do at that point in time. This exercise 
guides instructors to think not about the end of a one-shot 
or the result of an information literacy course, but instead 
to focus on longer-term student outcomes. 
As part of the Dream Exercise and reflection about 
instructional outcomes, librarians should also consider 
what Fink calls “situational factors” to make sure the dream, 
outcomes, assessments, and teaching and learning activities 
align to the instructional context.12 The situational factors 
help librarians think about the context of the teaching/
learning situation, the nature and scope of the subject, the 
characteristics of the learners in front of them, and their 
own teaching philosophy. By considering these factors, the 
librarian can customize the instruction to meet the needs of 
the learners based on the format, delivery mode, and context 
of the instruction.
Step 2: Learning Outcomes 
The concept of learning outcomes is familiar to many librar-
ians. Learning outcomes, like the Dream Exercise, are a pow-
erful instructional design tool because they help the librarian 
design the lesson based upon what the student will do, not 
on what the librarian does. To create learning outcomes, the 
librarian takes the broad Dream Exercise goals and breaks 
them down into concrete learning outcomes. A single goal 
from the Dream Exercise may have a number of learning 
outcomes associated with it. Each learning outcome should 
be measurable, student centered, and focused on different 
levels of learning. The librarian should craft their learning 
outcomes carefully, employing action verbs that lend them-
selves to assessment so they can evaluate whether a student 
has achieved the outcome. For example, it is common to 
instinctively want to use verbs such as “know” or “under-
stand” when writing learning outcomes; for example, “At 
the end of this class, students will understand how to use 
Boolean operators.” But it is extremely difficult to quantify 
understanding. To make the learning outcome measurable, 
the librarian can replace “understanding” with another verb 
that is more easily assessed; for example, “At the end of this 
class, students will be able to design a search that incor-
porates Boolean operators.” This revised learning outcome 
depicts the task at hand that students need to perform, which 
could be easily assessed through simple observation. 
In addition to measurability, learning outcomes should 
focus on different levels of learning. The classification 
hierarchical framework of Bloom’s taxonomy of learning 
and the updated version by Krathwohl et al. have become 
the standard frameworks used for designing learning out-
comes.13 They are used for assessment and evaluation of 
learning, as well as for writing learning outcomes. Design-
ing learning outcomes using terminology from Bloom’s tax-
onomy helps articulate how students will learn and shows 
how students will be engaged at different levels. Bloom’s tax-
onomy levels include Remembering, Understanding, Apply-
ing, Analyzing, Evaluating, and Creating.14 Fink’s model also 
contains a learning taxonomy. The Fink Significant Learn-
ing Taxonomy contains six levels of learning: Foundational 
Knowledge, Application, Integration, Human Dimension, 
Caring, and Learning to Learn.15 The Fink taxonomy is 
not hierarchical and intended to be used in a way in which 
levels of learning overlap and integrate with each other. It 
is the interaction or intersection of several outcomes that 
Fink defines as the “Significant Learning” experience. For 
example, helping students apply the skills they learn during 
a library research session to their research paper assignment 
can also help students see how the skills they are learning 
in one place can be integrated with other academic projects 
and in other courses. 
Step 3: Alignment Grid
The alignment grid is the third and final step of the back-
ward design process. The alignment grid helps the librarian 
take the learning outcomes identified in step two and trans-
late them into assessable activities. In its most basic form, the 
alignment grid asks the instruction librarian to record four 
elements: the learning outcome, an assessment method, a 
learning activity, and any resources or equipment necessary 
to complete that activity. 
When completing the alignment grid, it is important 
to fill it out in order from left to right, beginning with the 
outcome. This means that the first step after the learning 
outcome is the assessment method. Although it may ini-
tially seem more natural to move from the learning outcome 
to the activity, Fink’s method requires that the assessment 
method be determined before designing the activity. In order 
to successfully achieve the learning outcome, it is important 
to be able to identify if students have grasped the concept. 
The assessment need not always be formal or summative 
in nature. When thinking about the assessment box in an 
alignment grid, the librarian should ask the question “How 
will I know if this learning outcome has been achieved?” The 
librarian can use a simple formative check on learning for 
some learning outcomes, with a more formal, artifact-pro-
ducing assessment method used at other points in the lesson.
Once the librarian determines the assessment method, it 
is time to craft the activity. It can be challenging to fit exist-
ing lesson plans and activities into the alignment grid, so 
it may be easier to craft an alignment grid for the first time 
when creating a new lesson plan with new activities. The 
alignment grid already provides the learning outcome and 
the assessment, so the instructional delivery method and 
learning activity should derive directly from those elements. 
For example, when collaborating with a faculty member for 
a five-week embedded information literacy series in a busi-
ness course, the course learning outcomes and assessment 
method (a group presentation) were predefined. However, 
the alignment grid helped to “chunk out” the library tasks 
and align to the Association of American Colleges and Uni-
versities (AACU) outcomes being used in the course. As a 
result, the library instruction was integrated and scaffolded 
across the semester. The process was graphically visible to 
both the librarian and faculty member and helped in the 
communication about and implementation of the library 
instruction.
The final column in the basic alignment grid is for listing 
resources needed to implement the lesson plan. That equip-
ment may be a computer lab or a laptop cart. It could be 
having Zotero installed on all of the computers, or it could 
be a pack of flip-chart paper. Regardless of the format, the 
resources section provides a place to pull all external tools 
together. It is also important to note that additional fields 
can be added to the alignment grid to make the backward 
design process more scaffolded or more transparent for the 
librarian or their instructor colleagues. For example, adding 
another column to the alignment grid could help align the 
librarian’s learning outcomes to the ACRL Framework or to 
an AACU rubric.
APPLICATION OF THE BACKWARD DESIGN 
PROCESS 
A variety of instructional design models and frameworks 
have incorporated the backward design process. At the 
University of Utah, instructional designers used Fink’s back-
ward design process as the foundation for a campus-wide 
instructional design model called the Quality Course Frame-
work (QCF).16 This instructional design model contains four 
phases of instruction design: The Design Phase, the Build 
Phase, the Teach Phase, and the Revise Phase (figure 1).
are integrated into the first phase of the QCF, the Design 
Phase. Once the alignment grid is completed in the Design 
Phase, librarians could then use the grid to build the learn-
ing materials in the Build Phase, plan the individual teaching 
activities in the Teach Phase, and reflect on the success of the 
teaching event in the Revise Phase. Librarians can also inte-
grate learning theories such as the ARCS motivation model 
into the planning of teaching activities.17 For example, when 
building a learning/teaching activity, thinking about how to 
engage students in that learning activity is just as important 
as the content of the activity. Using the ARCS model can 
help librarians intentionally consider how they can (1) grab 
the attention of the learners (A), (2) establish the relevance 
of the content you are teaching (R), (3) help build learner 
confidence (C), and (4) show how the learning is related to 
a real-world application to satisfy the learner (S). Therefore, 
going through the QCF process can not only help scaffold the 
instructional design, but also help librarians plan and deliver 
effective and impactful content for a variety of instructional 
contexts, from one-shots to full information literacy courses. 
Once librarians have used their Fink alignment grid 
to lay out the instructional plan, they can use that grid to 
facilitate discussions with faculty partners and demonstrate 
how library outcomes and learning activities can also align 
to the overall course outcomes, assessments, and learning 
activities. To help librarians talk about instructional plan-
ning with faculty, a project was undertaken at the University 
of Utah to create teaching guidelines. The guidelines were 
built upon the four phases of the QCF and were organized 
by values identified through brainstorming and discussions 
with a group of Education Services librarians.18 In addi-
tion, the teaching guidelines matrix document emphasizes 
the librarian role at each phase of the QCF. In the Design 
Phase, librarians act as instructional designers. In the Build 
Phase, librarians could act as instructional technologists and 
build instructional components for teaching. In the Teach 
Phase, librarians act as teachers and context experts, and in 
the Revise Phase, librarians should act as researchers and 
evaluate the library teaching and learning experience. The 
teaching guidelines can help librarians think through their 
different roles at these four phases of instructional design, 
teaching, and assessment and provide guidance on how they 
could work with faculty partners at these various phases. For 
example, figure 2 demonstrates guidelines for how librarians 
can interact with faculty when designing library instruc-
tion. The four columns were values identified by librarians, 
and bullets in each column are suggestions for how librar-
ians can help facilitate faculty partnerships, design effective 
instructional practices, create supportive and shared learn-
ing environments, and display professional responsibility as 
they design instruction. A similar process applies to each of 
the other three QCF phases.19
 CONCLUSION 
backward during instruction design and improve the quality 
and intentionality of library instruction.
