Title:
Digital Platforms and the Nature of the Firm
Abstract:
Abstract: Digital platforms turn traditional approaches of the ?rm, which relied on the 
wage relation to explain the major di?erence between ?rm and market, upside down and 
underline the advantages of coordination through organization over coordination through 
market. This study aims to propose a de?nition of the ?rm able to integrate, besides the 
integrated ?rm,  also  hybrid forms  such as  networks of subcontractor/subcontracting 
?rms as well as atypical forms such as digital platforms. By reactivating the ?rm-boundary 
problem, this article suggests putting valorization by labor at the heart of the ?rm’s decisions 
concerning integration. It suggests therefore a general de?nition of the ?rm as a techno-
institutional center of capital valorization, provided that ?rms make pro?ts by means of the 
appropriation of labor incorporated into their (productive, structural, intellectual) capital 
through institutional arrangements. By stressing the relation of production between the 
owners of the means of production and the direct producers, the approach of the ?rm 
supported here should allow to cover the di?erent existing models of the ?rm, from the 
classical ?rm to hybrid models, around which the boundary debate has revolved, to digital 
platforms.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Digital Platforms and the Theory of the Firm
 The Coasian Genesis of the Firm-Boundary Problem
 The Fuzzy Boundaries of the Firm in Transaction-Cost Theory
 Property Rights Theory’s Critique of Transaction-Cost Theory and its Failure to 
Solve the Integration Problem
 The Limitless Boundaries of the Resource-Based Firm
 The Quasi-Firm-Boundary Problem
 The Digital Platform-Boundary Solution
 Concluding Remarks


Text:
----------------------
Digital platforms turn traditional approaches of the ?rm, which relied upon the wage 
relation to explain the major di?erence between ?rm and market, upside down and underline 
the advantages of coordination through organization over coordination through market 
(Bauwens, Mendoza and Iacomella 2012; Botsman 2013; Hamari, Sjöklint and Ukkonen 
2015). Yet platform economics does not justify integration, neither by the reduction of 
transaction costs nor by the creation of organizational resources. Therefore, it calls for a 
renewal of the ?rm-boundary problem and the very de?nition of the ?rm. By their various 
modes of appropriation of the producers or consumers’ activity, however, digital platforms 
have put labor at the center of their valorization and therefore of their business models. But 
these various forms of labor appropriation exceed the framework of the traditional wage 
relation and reactivate, as we will see, ancient models of exploitation such as the putting-
out system. Digital platforms demonstrate what Ayres had formally theorized about the 
relationship between technological development and institutional structures, namely that 
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) have allowed a speci?cally capitalist
form of exploitation without wage labor. Here, technological changes are the sources of 
institutional changes regarding the labor power (Ayres 1944, 177). What characterizes 
indeed many of the digital platforms is that they do not need to hire employees for extracting 
value from their labor. By means of software programs, digital ?rms make pro?t instead by 
inserting themselves “between those who o?er services and others who are looking for them, 
thereby embedding extractive processes into social interactions” (Scholz 2016, 4). Commons 
de?ned the corporation as a going concern combining the going plant and the going business 
(Commons 1924; Guelzo 1976). But digital platforms are going concerns in which the going 
plant is reduced to some algorithms and software controlling the social activity for the pro?t 
of the going business. Most of the transactions are therefore business transactions. Since 
digital platforms use market relations extensively for valorizing their assets, the ?rm cannot 
be distinguished from market regarding transaction costs as supported by transaction-cost 
economics. Moreover, digital platforms question the resource-based theory of the ?rm since 
organizational resources are not located within a ?rm through management of co-operating 
hired workers. By subjecting potentially the whole of social activity, digital platforms have 
completely realized the Veblenian concept of predatory business enterprise (Veblen 1923, 
89; Jo 2018). In other words, platform economics paradoxically demonstrate more than 
traditional ?rms that the capitalist subjection of labor relies entirely upon the economic 
power of the owners of the means of the production which are at the source of new forms 
of cooperation between producers, consumers, users, et cetera, on which its business models 
rely (Bauwens, Mendoza, and Iacomella 2012). 
This article suggests putting valorization by labor at the heart of the ?rm’s strategies. 
“By turning his money into commodities that serve as the natural elements of a new 
product,” says Marx in a draft de?nition of the ?rm, “and as factors in the labor process, by 
incorporating living labor with their dead substance, the capitalist at the same time converts 
value, i.e. past, materialized, and dead labor into capital, into value with big value, a live 
monster that is fruitful and multiplies” (Marx [1867] 2010, 205). Today, digital-based ?rms 
are capable of extending their ?eld of exploitation well beyond workers’ direct labor, and 
capitalist ?rms in general never cease to ?nd new objects of predation. But since all these 
new objects, even the environment as such, always need the mediation of man’s activity, the 
concept of labor called upon here includes, in fact, the social activity insofar as it is somehow 
appropriated in order to be valorized by ?rms. 
By reactivating the ?rm-boundary problem, the article will show how labor appropriation 
steers ?rms' decisions concerning integration. It will show notably that neither asset speci?city 
nor the creation of speci?c resources leads to integration. Consequently, the ?rm cannot be 
grasped by its governance structure, as supported by transaction-cost economics, nor by its 
capabilities and resources produced within a circumscribed space of labor, as resource-based 
theory argues in objection to transaction-cost economics. But the features shared by quasi-
?rms with traditional ?rms and digital platforms prompt us to suggest a de?nition of the 
capitalist ?rm in general as a techno-institutional center of capital valorization or, to put it 
di?erently, of appropriation of others’ labor. The ?rm is a technological center since the 
relation of production relies upon and is carried out by a productive and organizational 
technology. But it is also an institutional entity, since it appropriates labor incorporated into 
their (productive, structural, intellectual) capital through institutional arrangements. As 
Commons put it, the going concern includes rationing transactions describing a relationship 
between legal superiors and inferiors. In the rationing transaction, the legal superior must
be able to take something from someone else and can be collective in nature as a board of 
directors apportioning the corporate budget (Guelzo 1976, 42). By stressing the relation of 
production between the owners of the means of production and the direct producers, the 
approach of the ?rm supported here should allow us to cover the di?erent existing models 
of the ?rm, from the classical ?rm to hybrid models, around which the boundary debate has 
revolved, to digital platforms. As will be seen, all these kinds of ?rms share the basic feature 
of extracting surplus labor either directly through work management, or indirectly through 
contracts and price mechanisms, or through percentages on services provided and by means 
of software technologies. In order to emphasize this aspect common to the di?erent kinds 
of ?rms, I will show how the de?nitions of the ?rm by transaction-cost economics (TCE), 
property-rights theory (PRT), and resource-based theory (RBT) encounter the ?rm-boundary 
problem and how this problem gets resolved by putting the exploitation of social labor at 
the heart of integration strategies of the ?rm. The critique of these approaches will gradually 
show that labor haunts them, calling for a re-de?nition of the ?rm which ?nds—in the digital 
platforms—its clearest illustration.
The article is structured as follows. The next section shows how digital platforms 
challenge these theories of the ?rm, by surpassing the disadvantages of the putting-out 
system and making pro?ts without authority and hierarchy. After having recalled the history 
of the ?rm-boundary problem, emphasis will be put on the way it has been dealt with by 
TCE, then PRT and ?nally RBT, in accordance with their respective approaches of the ?rm. 
The analysis of quasi-?rms, in particular the Toyota quasi-integration system, will show that 
only a de?nition of the ?rm that deals with labor as both producing goods and services and 
creating surplus value appropriated as pro?ts may account for hybrid models while drawing 
a clear boundary between ?rm and market. More generally, quasi-integration con?rms the 
priority of productive logic over logics of transaction costs and capabilities and resources. 
The penultimate section returns to digital platforms and deals with issues emphasized by the 
approach of the ?rm supported here. The last section concludes.
Digital Platforms and the Theory of the Firm
The development of information technologies alongside the growth of Web 2.0 has enabled 
the development of online platforms that promote user-generated content, sharing, and 
collaboration (Kaplan and Haenlein 2010). Capital has quickly taken advantage of these 
new modes of exchange through the creation of new kinds of ?rms called “digital bridge 
builders” which insert themselves between supply and demand of these services provided by 
independent workers (Harris and Krueger 2015), thereby “embedding extractive processes 
into social interactions” (Scholz 2016, 4).
By connecting individuals and communities potentially all around the world, platform-
based ?rms have blurred the distinction between ?rm and market more deeply than 
subcontracting and ?rms’ networks. Moreover, crowdsourcing blurs the boundaries of the 
?rm not only because it uses “collaboration mass weapons” (Tapscott and Williams 2010) 
extended to the whole of society, but also because local independent workers potentially have 
access to the global market. This business model has dramatically challenged the conceptual 
framework of transaction-cost economics. Indeed, digital platforms seem to have overcome 
all the disadvantages of the putting-out system that led to the creation of manufactures in 
the seventeenth century (Williamson 1985; Berg 1985, 85). It is well-known that among
the reasons that led the putting-out system to be replaced by manufactures were the lack of 
control over labor time and intensity, as well as over-quality of the products made by the craft 
workers (Marglin 1974, 94–95). The ITCs associated with systems of consumer assessment 
today allow these disadvantages to be overcome by strictly controlling both labor time and 
quality of the service accomplished by the independent workers. Moreover, digital platforms 
bene?t from what was the main advantage of the putting-out system, namely the collection 
of information to which their employees had special access (See Benkler 2002, 410–411). 
Digital platforms thus reduce information asymmetry as well as agents’ opportunism 
(moral hazard). Since transaction costs are much weaker, the platform-based ?rm does not 
lead to internalization of transactions (though software programs stand for some form of 
internalization). Here, the almost exclusive function of the ?rm is to capture or extract 
value by reducing market failures through software, facilitating information exchange and 
increasing competition between independent workers.
Since Adam Smith, it has been the norm to see wage labor as the typically capitalist 
relationship of employment, with pro?ts, wages, and rents as the typical forms of income 
resulting from that relationship. Yet the putting-out system depicts a relation of employment 
where pro?ts of capital result from the extraction of surplus labor, whereas the worker does 
not sell her labor power for wages but the product of her labor itself. However, the capitalist 
nature of this relation of production seems so undisputable to historians and economists 
that all the debate about the transition to the era of manufactures was focused on the 
reasons pushing the entrepreneurs to hire the labor power in these factories. In a certain 
way, it is true that transaction-cost economics, and more generally the conception of the 
?rm as a nexus of contracts, made it possible to include the putting-out kind of employment 
relationship among the ?rm’s contractual relationships. But the disadvantages of the putting-
out system have precisely led TCE to ask, “Why do ?rms exist?” since the putting-out system 
can be reduced to a market relationship with high transaction costs due to information 
asymmetry and moral hazard: high bu?er inventories, weak leadership in contracting, local 
responsiveness and system responsiveness respects, high transportation costs (Williamson 
1980, 22). Hence, authority and hierarchy as the way to lower transaction costs related to the 
contractual relation of employment.
Even though authority and hierarchy have almost completely disappeared from the 
platform employment relationship (Harris and Krueger 2015, 10), the investments made 
in technologies necessary to connect the stakeholders or users of the platform allow the 
platform-based ?rm to make pro?ts on the services provided through contractual devices, 
in the same way as the merchant-coordinators were making pro?ts on the individual 
entrepreneur’s work.
Therefore, digital platforms show that, against TCE, the ?rm may rely on coordination 
through market as well as internal coordination. They thereby con?rm contract theory, 
according to which ?rm and market di?er only according to the degree of contractual 
commitment between agents. More generally, digital platforms justify the contractual 
approach of the ?rm, because, in this case, the link connecting the worker to the ?rm is 
exclusively contractual and her productive activity is realized outside any organizational 
framework. For PRT, only property institutes the manager’s hierarchical authority over the 
worker, namely the residual control rights on the use of her non-human assets. Yet, the 
holders of these residual control rights have power or authority over human assets, since 
employees need physical assets to be productive (Hart and Moore 1990). Contract theory
does not deny the importance of cooperation in the running of non-human assets. According 
to Armen Alchian and Harold Demsetz (1972), authority and control over the labor of ?rms’ 
employees, and consequently the very existence of the ?rm, are indeed justi?ed by imperfect 
information and moral hazard resulting from the inherently cooperative use of productive 
assets (Alchian and Demsetz 1972, 799). What is neglected, however, is the fact that this 
cooperation relies in turn upon the social nature of the assets which constitute and explain 
the manager’s authority and hierarchy. Imperfect information and moral hazard are just the 
consequences of the fact that human assets are employed in order to valorize non-human 
assets and concern the bilateral contractual relationship between the employer and the 
employee. In digital platforms, as well as in traditional ?rms, the manager’s power over the 
worker relies entirely upon the power to manage the means of production necessary to the 
workers’ social and individual reproduction. By founding the authority and incentives on 
property, PRT not only makes no distinction between ?rm and market except in accordance 
to their degree of property but also neglects the fact that the property of non-human assets 
determines a relation of production exceeding the framework of interpersonal property 
rights.
In the capitalist ?rm in general, the property rights ordering the relations between 
managers and employees are structured not, as PRT claims, by the collective use of the non-
human assets as such, but by the social relation of production under which these non-human 
assets are used and valorized. Since the use and valorization of non-human assets are planned 
through contractual and organizational arrangements, we suggest de?ning the ?rm as a 
techno-institutional center of valorization (i.e., of extraction of surplus labor). By focusing 
on the way labor is organized and extracted in order to valorize capital, this approach of the 
?rm may renew and clarify the problem of the ?rm’s boundaries.
The Coasian Genesis of the Firm-Boundary Problem
Ronald Coase published his ?rst article on the nature of the ?rm in 1937, one year after 
the publication of Keynes’ General Theory (1936), which reversed the traditional relation 
between supply and demand in the equilibrium of prices and quantities. The starting point 
of Coase’s argument is: “why do ?rms exist, since the market is supposed to ensure the 
optimal allocation of economic agents’ resources?” His question implies that standard theory 
only dealt with owners of goods, services or assets, and that production could be de jure 
totally realized through market exchange, as in the putting-out system. Moreover, the theory 
of factor productivity should demonstrate that labor, land, and capital are paid according 
to their productivity, provided that they freely exchange on the market (see Clark 1907, 
144). Therefore, Coase’s question is not “why production?” but rather “why the hierarchical 
organization of the production?”—in other words—“why the capitalist ?rm?” Coase agrees 
with the standard dogma according to which the market is the optimal way to allocate 
resources in the short run. But standard approaches of the ?rm have justi?ed the ?rm only 
by the necessity to combine factors in such a way that pro?ts be maximized, in other words, 
that supply and demand for goods and factors be in equilibrium). However, Coase notes 
that the ?rm exists in order to coordinate long-term exchange relations which are prone to 
uncertainty and information asymmetry (Coase 1937, 391). Put di?erently, the manager’s 
hierarchical authority has to replace prices and quantities in order to coordinate the factors 
of production, in other words, to equalize the incomes of factors with their productivity
and balance production (Palermo 2000). Coase has thus left an ambivalent contribution 
to the theory of the ?rm. On the one hand, he reintegrated within standard theory issues 
which had been deliberately discarded, such as production, labor management, authority, et 
cetera. On the other hand, he introduced within the ?rm the categories speci?c to market 
relations of exchange (Pitelis 1993). What will become TCE with Oliver Williamson (1975) 
is precisely to elaborate on marginal foundations a theory of production, division of labor, 
capitalist enterprise, et cetera, namely elements which were excluded from economic theory. 
The new theory should therefore explain and justify on these very foundations the existence 
of all the excluded economic relations, particularly the capital/labor relationship within 
the ?rm. Since the market is the prior institution of the contracting parties, choosing the 
?rm as a means to coordinate assets should only result from market failures (Arrow 1974). 
Coase’s theory of the ?rm therefore does not deal with the origins of production under 
capitalism, but directly starts with the market economy whose failures push the producers 
or asset owners to set up mechanisms of coordination not covered by market coordination: 
“In the beginning, there were markets,” said Williamson (1975, 20). But since the basic 
assumptions of standard theory are preserved, notably methodological individualism and 
preference maximization, TCE assumes a vision of the ?rm primarily as a bundle of bilateral 
exchange relations, not as a proper institutional space of production organization. 
By de?ning the ?rm as a mode of coordination alternative to market and as a solution 
to market failures, Coase’s theory is closely related to a speci?c phase of capitalism during 
which “The Nature of the Firm” was written. The growth of large corporations, the power 
of ?rms to control prices and markets, the scienti?c management of labor and production 
within multidivisional ?rms, et cetera, stress the fact that ?rms control the markets rather 
than reacting to their signals (Chandler 1977). Whereas William Lazonick argues correctly 
that Coase “casts the ?rm as a passive player that arises out of ‘market failure’ rather than 
‘organizational success’” (Lazonick 1991, 169), the point of the rise of the modern ?rm at 
that time was rather to o?set the weakness of market as a coordinating power by transferring 
its basic mechanisms to non-market institutions such as corporations. Before being a proper 
theory of the ?rm, Coase’s theory is, in the ?rst place, a theory of market decline arising from 
the development of capitalism.
The Fuzzy Boundaries of the Firm in Transaction-Cost Theory
The ?rm-boundary problem arose again and developed from the 1980s onwards, when 
liberalization and deregulation of ?nancial markets launched the second wave of mergers 
and acquisitions, while ?nancial analysts serving institutional investors forced large 
corporations to fall back on their core competency and outsource numerous parts of the 
value chain (Prahalad and Hamel 1990). Hence the renewed interest in TCE, which gives 
theoretical tools to the ?rm’s choice to make or buy and sees the ?rm and its boundaries 
in terms of exchange relations, not only between managers and employees, but between 
the ?rm and its suppliers, subcontractors, customers, et cetera (Williamson 1975). From 
this viewpoint, the boundary problem was closely related to the hold-up problem arising 
as soon as ?rms make investments in speci?c assets (Klein, Crawford, and Alchian 1978). 
The subcontractor investing in speci?c assets may thus be threatened by an unfavorable 
renegotiation of contracts by the contracting ?rm, which may take advantage of the fact that 
the valorization of the subcontractor’s assets depends exclusively on the performance of its
own assets. Conversely, the contracting ?rm is prone to opportunism for the subcontractor 
who has the monopoly on the goods or services it provides (Klein, Crawford, and Alchian 
1978, 299).
Regarding the formal relationship between economic agents, TCE makes no di?erence 
between labor, inter-?rm, and market relationships, which are all contractual relationships 
subjected to information asymmetry and opportunism. Di?erences concern only the nature 
of the contract linking the parties within a continuum between the ?rm and the market. It 
is true that Williamson sees authority as the distinguishing feature of the relation between 
the manager and its employees (Williamson 1975, 71–72). But authority may apply to very 
di?erent forms of organizations. Moreover, Williamson associates the authority relation to 
the ?rm because of the employees’ character and behavior within the ?rm, not because of 
the nature of the ?rm’s functions (i.e., not because of what the ?rm makes). According to 
TCE, what distinguishes the ?rm from the market and justi?es it is not the speci?c nature of 
the ?rm’s activity (production) but the contractual relationship speci?c to this activity (the 
employment relation).
However, the employment relation is only a part of the contractual relationships of 
the ?rm. The strength of TCE comes precisely from its ability to conceptualize all of these 
relationships. According to Williamson, one should not draw any distinction between 
transactions on the (internal or external) labor market and transactions on the market 
of intermediary products (Williamson 1986, 87), nor therefore between the assembly of 
multiple tasks under the manager’s authority and the assembly of groups of tasks which 
are technologically distinct from each other (Williamson 1975, 82). Insofar as transactions 
are concerned, Williamson sees the same factors at the source of the respective costs and 
advantages of ?rms and markets.
Nevertheless, though TCE gives a theoretical framework to integration strategies, 
the boundaries of the ?rm seem to remain theoretically ill-de?ned. Why would savings in 
transaction costs not lead to the integration of the entire production by one giant ?rm? In other 
words, why not a planned economy? Following Coase, Williamson discards this possibility 
by emphasizing the rise of bureaucratic costs and erosion of incentives (Williamson 1975, 
126–130). But insofar as integration choice depends on di?erences between internal and 
external transaction costs, what excludes de jure the possibility that integration costs would 
always be weaker than market transaction costs, or, which is the same, that technological 
e?ciency would be always higher than transaction costs and weakening incentives? Moreover, 
progressive integration of the entire production could favor technological nonseparability 
to such an extent that it would justify internal control of human and non-human assets 
(Alchian and Demsetz 1972). This problem emphasizes the failure of TCE to understand 
the ?rm as a process of production distinct from exchange relations rather than just in 
accordance with the market (i.e., only as a solution to market failures). Even though TCE 
founds the ?rm on the manager’s authority over potentially opportunistic employees and 
even incorporates dynamic adaptation processes (Williamson 1999), the ?rm is nonetheless 
understood as an institution whose choices are exclusively steered by ?nancial strategies. Not 
only does TCE embrace the manager’s point of view by theorizing her choices and trade-
o?s, but it also grasps her activity as exclusively concerned with the pro?ts of the ?rm and 
disconnected from the management of the production process. Di?erences between TCE 
and PRT, which I will soon address, has less to do with di?erences in control procedures 
against opportunism (Quélin 2002, 65–66) than with the function of ?rm management. In
PRT, management is required by the aggregation of human and non-human assets in the 
production process, whereas in TCE, it is required by the aggregation of exchange relations 
for which hierarchical authority reduces the transaction costs. Since PRT’s critique of TCE 
is based on the requirements of the combination of human and non-human assets necessary 
to the productive activity and thus to the valorization process, let us look at the way it solves 
the boundary-problem of the ?rm.
Property Rights Theory’s Critique of Transaction-Cost Theory and its Failure to 
Solve the Integration Problem
PRT’s vision of the ?rm comes closer to its productive purpose by linking the manager’s 
role to ownership of tradable assets, and thus by seeing the relations within the ?rm as 
social relations of production. As de?ned by Alchian and Demsetz (1972), the ?rm is a team 
production in which the combination of assets to produce output requires the control of 
productivity and distribution of incomes between human assets by a manager emerging from 
the team. What characterizes the capitalist ?rm is joint input production with numerous 
owners, among whom one (the manager) is common to all the contracts of the joint inputs 
and holds the residual claim as an incentive to monitor the assets. Alchian and Demsetz’s 
?rm is like an auction market managed by a kind of Walrasian auctioneer since the manager 
has no authority over other team members. She has to protect them (Blair and Stout 1999, 
253) since her function is to guarantee the optimum use of inputs and the fair income 
distribution to the factors. Among collective organizations, only the capitalist ?rm, as a 
pro?t-making organization, seems to require a manager for controlling possible shirking 
by other team members (Alchian and Demsetz 1972, 795). Oliver Hart claims that PRT 
answers the question that TCE is unable to solve: “Why are the risks of hold-up minimized 
with integration and what are the costs of integration?” According to Hart, what integration 
changes are the residual claims, notably concerning the use of assets (Hart 1995). Therefore, 
he de?nes the ?rm with Sanford Grossman as an entity owning means of production 
(Grossman and Hart 1986, 692) and argues that ownership permits holding all the rights 
unspeci?ed by the contract (i.e., the residual rights). “Ownership is the purchase of the 
residual rights to control” (Grossman and Hart 1986, 692). 
For Hart and Grossman, integration does not rule out opportunism, as claimed by 
TCE. Moreover, the assumptions of TCE give no sound reason to limit the size of the ?rm 
(Grossman and Hart 1986, 692–693). If we do not dismiss the totally abstract neoclassical 
assumption of maximization under constraint of decreasing returns to scale (Williamson 
1985, 93), trade-o? between internal production costs and market transaction costs 
theoretically sets no limit to the expansion of the ?rm. According to PRT, integration must 
rather be understood in terms of ownership and residual rights of control: “integration in 
itself does not change the cost of writing down a particular contractual provision. What does 
change is who has control over those provisions not included in the contract” (Grossman and 
Hart 1986, 695). But integration also entails costs, insofar as ownership transfer reduces the 
seller’s rights and thus her incentives (Grossman and Hart 1986, 693). There is no criterion 
except the practice allowing to decide whether the incentives to opportunism are higher 
than the advantages of integration (i.e., residual rights of control), particularly regarding 
the pro?ts resulting from integration. Moreover, in PRT trade-o? between integration and 
outsourcing depends exclusively on circumstances: since residual rights of control allow a
higher part of income to be derived from inputs, integration would be “optimal when one 
?rm’s investment decision is particularly important relative to the other ?rm’s.” In addition, 
nonintegration is desirable when both investment decisions are ‘somewhat’ important” 
(Grossman and Hart, 716–717). As in TCE, the choice of integration remains theoretically 
indeterminate.
Although they follow Oliver Hart and John Moore’s property rights vision of the ?rm, 
Bengt Holmström and John Roberts have criticized them for underrating other bene?ts 
of non-human assets ownership than measurement cost and control, such as incentives 
and productive e?ciency (Holmström and Roberts 1998). They noted that many ?rms, 
notably under the subcontracting system, do not decide in favor of vertical integration even 
though they face very high levels of uncertainty, frequent renegotiations, and use of very 
speci?c assets, (see also Dyer 1997, 543–544). Moreover, co-dependent assets and frequent 
renegotiations seem to favor cooperation between independent ?rms rather than integration. 
Indeed, for Holmström the primary reason for integration is not avoiding risks of hold-up, 
but rather having power over human capital thanks to ownership and control of non-human 
assets, assigning tasks, delegating authority, and setting the principles that structure implicit 
and explicit incentives (Holmström 1999, 76). Holmström’s incentive theory indeed claims 
to provide a genesis of the ?rm as a bundle of property rights (Holmström 1999). Whereas 
PRT allows an explanation of how assets are distributed between ?rms, given a set of assets 
and investment activities, it fails to explain how these property rights are created. In order 
to grasp it and thus account for the very existence of the ?rm and its boundaries, it is 
more important to explain how and why investment activities are themselves distributed. 
According to Holmström, the boundary question is what the ?rms do rather than what 
they possess (Holmström and Roberts 1998, 87). From this perspective, understanding the 
structure of assets would only amount to understanding the structure of investment activities.
Nonetheless, this move from assets to activities brings out new questions: why do ?rms 
(or managers) own mostly non-human assets used in production? And conversely, why do 
workers own hardly any such assets? Put di?erently, why does the capitalist ?rm exist, insofar 
as it is based on the fact that workers do not own their means of production? The ultimate 
question is therefore: Why property? Why ?rms, insofar as they are de?ned by ownership 
of tradable assets? All the suggestions made by Holmström assume as given precisely what 
is to be explained, namely the possibility for a ?rm to possess non-human assets in order to 
have power over human assets. He suggests that ?rms own non-human assets, because this 
reinforces their bargaining power with external parties or because this in?uences the terms 
of ?nancing assets. But the bene?ts of owning assets do not explain how and why these 
assets may be privately owned. Holmström claims that the most important reason to own 
non-human assets is to be able to assign human assets to tasks in a way that is more pro?table 
than if ownership were not concentrated. But one of the questions was precisely: why do 
workers not own non-human assets (Holmström 1999, 88–89)? More generally, although 
Holmström and Roberts show the bene?ts of owning means of production and thus of 
making rather than buying, they do not explain the conditions allowing ?rms to own these 
means and take advantage of them by employing human assets deprived of these means. 
They show how extensive is the managers’ power resulting from ownership of tradable assets, 
but it is as if e?ciency and incentives served as an explanation of the power relation between 
managers and employees. If opportunism, e?ciency, or control certainly explain the ?rm’s 
choice to make or buy, they do not account for the very existence of the ?rm (i.e., ownership
of assets). Moreover, as will be shown, control and incentives over human assets do not 
allow one to delimit the boundaries of the ?rm, any more than residual rights of control do. 
However, by emphasizing the importance of incentives and e?ciency of human assets in the 
ownership of non-human assets, Holmström and Roberts have shifted the focus from assets 
to activities and thus from the ?rm’s structure of property to its joint process of production 
and valorization.
The Limitless Boundaries of the Resource-Based Firm
In fact, drawing the boundaries of the capitalist ?rm requires knowing its nature and 
function. If one understands capital as a mode of production and not just as a source of 
revenue, as Thomas Piketty (2014) contends, the function of the ?rm appears as dual and 
consists in producing goods and services in order to valorize productive investment (i.e., 
to make pro?ts from investment). What indeed characterizes a capitalist enterprise is that 
production of goods and services is jointly a valorization process (Marx [1867] 2010, 208). 
The ?rm is then a techno-institutional center in which production and distribution of goods 
and services by labor are the means of valorizing the assets used in that process.
Prima facie, RBT seems to be the only ?rm model to explicitly link valorization to 
the production of speci?c goods or services by de?ning the ?rm as a bundle of capabilities, 
organizational routines, and knowledge produced thanks to a combination of resources 
and cooperation between stakeholders of the ?rm (Coriat and Weinstein 2010, 60–62). All 
these routines, forms of knowledge, and capabilities give the ?rm a competitive advantage 
(Barney 1991) resulting in “rents to costly-to-copy productive assets” (Conner 1991, 144). As 
dynamic capabilities, now ?rms exist not because of market failures as in TCE, but because 
markets for planned innovating products do not yet exist (Teece 2010, 175). It is up to the 
?rms to create them according to an enlarged vision of the ?rm that not only creates value 
but captures value on the new markets it creates at the same time (Pitelis and Teece 2009, 
6). Therefore, ?rms exist in order to create or co-create the markets necessary to capture 
value, in addition to creating value, thanks to their competitive advantage and their dynamic 
capabilities (Pitelis and Teece 2009, 11; see also Teece 2006). Whereas according to Coase 
and Williamson, the ?rm is a kind of private market, for Christos Pitelis and David Teece 
the market appears as a public ?rm since according to this approach, the basic function 
of the ?rm is to create a permanent disequilibrium by means of innovation. Undoubtedly 
the ?rm’s purpose of pro?t maximization is reached through innovations and dynamic 
capabilities that “escape the zero-pro?t condition” (Augier and Teece 2008, 1190). But this 
purpose does not relate to the ?rm as a productive organization. It only demonstrates that 
production of goods and services is subjected to pro?t maximization. More generally, the 
concepts of “capability” or “routine” concern parts of the ?rm’s activity that do not enter 
the valorization of productive capital but are relied upon in the ?rm’s connections with 
external parties (customers, suppliers, et cetera). This “relational capital” is certainly a part 
of the immaterial capital taken into account by ?nancial analysts in the market valuation of 
the ?rm (Abhayawansa and Guthrie 2010), but it does not contribute to the valorization of 
the ?rm’s productive assets.
Furthermore, although Pitelis and Teece claim to be able to grasp the positive nature 
of the ?rm in opposition to TCE, which justi?es it only negatively as a solution to market 
failures, their approach does not solve the ?rm-boundary problem, insofar as it extends to
all the relations of the ?rm, and thus to the entire economy, the power of creating the value 
captured by the ?rm (Pitelis and Teece 2009, 10). How can one delimit the boundaries of a 
?rm whose management is based on communities of users or sharers connected to worldwide 
communication networks such as digital platforms? The resource-based theory, by founding 
the identity of the ?rm on its organizational and collective nature, is prone to include the 
entire “knowledge society” (or the sharing society) as a stakeholder of the ?rm. For di?erent 
reasons, neither TCE and PRT, nor RBT are able to strictly delimit the boundaries of the 
?rm: TCE and RPT because the ?rm di?ers from market exclusively with respect to the 
nature and amount of costs resulting from the incomplete contracts; RBT because the ?rm 
is not distinguished from the whole of its connections with all its stakeholders.
But even when the concept of capability is strictly limited to the organization of 
production, the boundaries of the ?rm remain unde?ned. According to RBT, the choice to 
integrate one or some parts of the value chain depends on the possibility to develop a speci?c 
competence (Argyres and Zenger 2012). But as will be analyzed below, speci?c skills may be 
developed through hybrid forms of organization in which the ?rm relies on the market for 
creating its organizational advantage. Moreover, platform-based ?rms may rely exclusively on 
the market for taking advantage of the distributed skills and competences and spontaneous 
co-operation between users and sharers. As Laura Poppo and Todd Zenger (1998) noted 
after Je?rey Bradach and Robert Eccles (1989), “the same exchange conditions such as asset 
speci?city or measurement accuracy may indeed hinder the performance of hierarchical 
exchanges as well as market performance” (Poppo and Zenger 1998, 854). Moreover, the 
indeterminate boundaries of the resource-based ?rm seem to reinforce the position of TCE 
regarding this issue. Indeed, Nicolai Foss has remarked that “the boundaries of the ?rm are 
di?cult to rationalize except on a standard contractual basis” (Foss 1996, 475) when ?rms 
have the opportunity to communicate knowledge to supplier ?rms (Dyer 1997, 546). Only 
this contractual basis apparently justi?es the di?erent strategic choices of the ?rm in order 
to develop its capabilities by applying to them the criterion of comparison between internal 
organization costs and market costs (Langlois 1992, 110; Baudry and Chassagnon 2010, 
496).
If the ?rm is de?ned as a bundle of organizational capabilities, therefore, its boundaries 
would be delimited by all the assets contributing both to the production of routines and 
competences and to the process of valorization. It would be therefore necessary to exclude 
from the boundaries of the ?rm the suppliers, subcontractors, customers, et cetera who 
do not take part in the valorization process of productive assets; indeed the economic 
operations between them and the ?rm consist in exchange of money for goods or services, 
notwithstanding information exchange contributing to the creation of the contracting ?rm’s 
speci?c resources. Although the subcontracted output is produced by means of speci?c 
assets, it is bought by the contracting ?rm. Since it is a mere act of exchange, it does not 
come into the production process. Thus, the concept of capability or resource is either too 
narrow or too broad for drawing the boundaries of the ?rm: too narrow, since it excludes 
the valorization process from the production process; too broad, since some resources are 
created through relations of exchange with parties external to the contracting ?rm and are 
not part of its own valorization process (Langlois 2003). It fuses production relations and 
market relations under the same concept, even though a clear distinction between them is 
necessary to delimit the boundaries of the ?rm within which the valorization process takes 
place.
The Quasi-Firm-Boundary Problem
We have seen how TCE, PRT, and RBT meet di?culties in dealing with vertical integration 
and ?rm-boundary problems. However, these approaches disclose their limitations mostly 
when they tackle hybrid models. Hybrid models have been analyzed by many scholars, but 
mostly in order to stress their speci?c advantages with respect to vertical integration and 
market relations. Williamson (1991) himself notably insists on close contractual relations as 
a way to compensate the weak coordination of market relations between the contracting ?rms 
(1991, 280). According to Anoop Madhok (2002) however, the bene?ts of hybrid models 
surpass transaction costs and allow ?rms to create and operate resources and capabilities. 
In addition to governance structure and transaction costs, the characteristics of resources 
determine the boundary choice of a ?rm (Madhok 2002, 541). To the extent that inter?rm 
collaboration permits joint production of resources, the distinction between production 
and exchange is blurred since ?rms choose hybrid models in order to not only lower their 
transaction costs but to increase e?ciency and create more value. However, Madhok assumes 
a narrow de?nition of the quasi-?rm as the product of alliance between two or more 
independent ?rms. But since the distinction between production and exchange is blurred, 
how can we delimit the boundaries of the ?rm? As soon as ?rms form alliances, “there 
is a coevolution between the competencies of ?rms and those of their partners” (Madhok 
2002, 546). Here again, the quasi-?rm issue is dealt with in terms of bene?ts for ?rms to 
adopt hybrid forms, yet by obfuscating the boundary problem arising with these forms. 
Michael Jacobides and William Billinger show through an empirical study that the boundary 
problem does not arise from the distinction between buying or making, but that ?rms may 
choose mixed and dynamic forms between them (Jacobides and Billinger 2006, 258). Even 
though their study shows how a ?rm is led to change its boundaries over time according to 
valorization strategies, it does not deal with the question: what are the boundaries of a ?rm 
engaging in hybrid relations with other ?rms? The existing literature stresses the advantages 
of hybrid models which surpass the transaction cost problems and the fact that e?ciency 
and productivity prevail among these advantages (Powell, Koput, and Smith-Doerr 1996; 
Grant 1996; Dyer 2000). But it does not deal with the boundary problem arising from these 
hybrid forms in which the distinction of production and exchange is blurred. Interestingly, 
Mark Granovetter (1985) sees the quasi-?rm as closer to vertical integration than to market 
relations but understands it as interactions between a contractor and subcontractors 
geographically close to each other where the latter are supervised by the former (Granovetter 
1985, 497–498). More generally, he stresses the importance of social and personal relations 
in the choice of vertical integration or market relations. In the wake of TCE indeed, close 
social relations between ?rms may compensate high transaction costs arising from market 
relations between ?rms and thus prevent them from vertical integration (1985, 498).
I claimed above that, since subcontracting is a market relation between two or more 
legally independent ?rms, it should exclude subcontractors from the boundaries of the 
contracting ?rm. This seems to meet the vision of TCE according to which subcontracting 
is a hybrid market transaction. However, what justi?es exclusion of subcontractors from the 
boundaries of the ?rm is not the recourse to the market as such, but the fact that the value 
exchanged between two independent ?rms does not produce more value than previously 
created by these ?rms. Goods or services bought by the contracting ?rm are certainly a part 
of the ?nal output, but they have just valorized the productive capital of the subcontractor.
The contracting ?rm has hypothetically bought them at their value, thus realizing the surplus 
value (pro?ts) produced by the subcontractor. Things are di?erent when it appropriates a part 
of the surplus value produced by the subcontractor through transfer pricing mechanisms. In 
this case, not only is the output part of the ?nal output, but the surplus value incorporated 
into the former has valorized the contracting ?rm’s assets. Here, everything seems as if 
market transaction was realized between divisions of the ?rm through transfer pricing. This 
case of “hold-up” by the contracting ?rm is enabled by the speci?city of the subcontractor’s 
assets but leads neither to subsequent underinvestment nor to vertical or lateral integration. 
However, the subcontractor, despite its legal independence, must be seen as included within 
the boundaries of the contracting ?rm. This is indeed a case of quasi-integration (Houssiaux 
1957, 2221) which shows the inadequacy of the TCE conception of the ?rm. Indeed, in a 
great number of industrial strategies, recourse to market is merely formal and does not relate 
to incentives or transaction cost problems, but only to productive e?ciency or combination 
and organization of the value chain. On the other hand, quasi-integration con?rms that 
concepts of capability or resource, insofar as they are sources of rents, no longer allow us 
to delimit the boundaries of the ?rm. Here, the ?rm’s strategy consists simultaneously of 
concentrating on its core competencies and appropriating the surplus value produced in 
the outsourced segments of the value chain. The speci?c competence of the ?rm is neither 
su?cient to de?ne the nature of the ?rm nor to delimit its boundaries. Quasi-?rms show in 
particular that asset speci?city does not necessarily lead to vertical integration. In some cases, 
it allows the contracting ?rm to gain power over the subcontractors through transfer pricing 
by which it appropriates a part of the pro?ts or rents created by subcontractors thanks to 
their specialized know-how.
Let us take the famous and often-commented case of the Toyota system (Monden 1994; 
Dyer 2000). The ?rm uses the “parallel order” system in order to stimulate competition between 
its suppliers, not only over quality, but also over price (the visible hand of competition; see 
Itami 1988). In fact, the only ?exibility of the suppliers with respect to Toyota is to develop 
their R&D in order to rationalize production and gain additional margins on their selling 
prices, which are ?xed according to the former production methods. Yet these improvements 
are also pro?table to Toyota (Shimizu 1999, 73–74). Benjamin Coriat has noted that “In 
Japan—as anywhere else in the world—relations between large and small subcontracting ?rms 
are marked by a certain asymmetry showing more or less strongly inequality of economic 
relations of power between contracting entities” (Coriat 1991,109; see also Houssiaux 1957, 
232) This leads to less investment in ?xed capital by the contracting ?rm, rents on the 
wage di?erence between employees of large and small ?rms, and amortization of cyclical 
?uctuations e?ects (Coriat 1991, 109). In fact, the kind of subcontracting speci?c to Toyota 
allows the ?rm to take advantage of all the bene?ts of integration through contractual 
relations of market. Furthermore, subcontractors of the Toyota system accumulate speci?c 
know-how thanks to their long relationship with the contracting ?rm, so that this relationship 
allows continuous inter-?rm organizational innovation. This accumulated immaterial capital 
explains why the contracting ?rm has di?culty changing its subcontractors, since it would 
destroy the resources of accumulated know-how (Dyer 2000, 549–550).
The Toyota system illustrates a case where the ?rm is grasped, beyond its traditional 
boundaries, by its speci?c competencies. But it is only insofar as these competencies concern
the process of production, and thus of valorization, that RBT can delimit the boundaries of 
the Japanese ?rm more accurately than TCE or PRT. In other words, Toyota’s subcontractors 
have developed not only technical know-how, but organizational know-how, allowing the 
highest continuity, ?exibility and speed for the lean production process (Coriat 1991, 226). 
RBT therefore not only identi?es the ?rm di?erently—despite having similar empirical 
results as TCE (Carter and Hodgson 2006)—but, as we have seen, can inde?nitely extend 
the boundaries of the ?rm as long as relational capital is not related to the processes of 
production and valorization of the ?rm’s productive assets. What allows us to distinguish 
the part of the relational capital relied upon in the valorization process from other parts is 
that ?rst, it gives rise to relational rents and second, it may be shared between the ?rm and 
its subcontractors in theory, something which can never be the case between the ?rm and 
its customers. The Japanese ?rm and its suppliers and subcontractors, as integrated from 
the perspective of their organizational and technical competencies on the one hand, and 
contractualized from the perspective of their formal relations on the other, are indeed quasi-
integrated and together draw the boundaries of a single ?rm. 
In their seminal article on the boundaries of the ?rm, Klein, Crawford, and Alchian 
claim that hold-up threatens not only the supplier or subcontractor which has invested in 
speci?c assets, but also the contracting ?rm, since the subcontractor may hold a monopolistic 
position vis-à-vis the ?rm (Klein, Crawford, and Alchian 1978, 299). Theoretically, then, 
speci?c assets may threaten the two contracting parties. But how, practically, could a 
subcontractor, whose assets are totally dedicated to the production of output exclusively 
bought by the contracting ?rm, ever exert any pressure on the latter? According to the 
authors, the threat of hold-up risks bringing about underinvestment—or even no investment 
at all—from the subcontractor. We may object that the possibility of underinvestment or no 
investment is a risk to society’s well-being and so does not just concern the ?rm itself, which 
in any case always takes decisions motivated by pro?t, though under bounded rationality. 
Moreover, referring to underinvestment means replacing the framework of positive 
analysis by normative arguments. The problem at hand is to analyze what happens when a 
subcontracting relationship occurs, not to state what is likely not to occur. Yet, within this 
kind of relationship, it seems clear that the contracting ?rm has power over its subcontractor 
(Dyer 2000, 358). Moreover, this kind of relationship implies appropriation of the whole 
or part of the quasi-rents generated by speci?c investments of the subcontractor. This case 
does not lead to vertical integration, neither from the contracting ?rm whose transaction 
costs are compensated by the amount of the appropriated rent, nor from the supplier whose 
position gives it no recourse to this option. Its only possibility would be to exit the market. 
But subcontracting is a strategy decided by the contracting ?rm itself and most often does 
not relate to any strategic logic between two or more independent ?rms. Therefore, it does 
not come under the logic of transaction costs, which is entirely based on bounded rationality 
and opportunism. It basically comes under the logic of the valorization allowed by new 
technological possibilities (NTICs, polyvalent machinery, modular production, et cetera).2
Hybrid models such as quasi-integration challenge traditional theories of the ?rm. 
Moreover, they show how the joint logic of production and valorization processes explains 
the nature and stakes of the relationship between contracting ?rms and delimits clearly 
their boundaries which remain otherwise blurred. Although contractual relations apparently 
prevail among the multiple stakeholders, hybrid models show paradoxically the importance 
of living labor exploitation in the understanding of industrial strategy of the ?rms. But above 
all, they show us how digital platforms go one step further in this logic of social activity 
exploitation.
The Digital Platform-Boundary Solution
We have seen how TCE, PRT, and RBT have faced di?culties in solving the (quasi)?rm-
boundary problem. TCE—and from this point of view also PRT—clearly distinguishes the 
?rm from the market, but only from the perspective of their contractual relations, not with 
respect to the speci?c function of the ?rm regarding the market: production of goods or 
services incorporating surplus value appropriated as pro?ts. Consequently, the trade-o? 
between internal organization costs and market costs remains practically indeterminate. 
Thus, concerning organizational change able to reduce the internal transaction costs of the 
?rm, Williamson unjusti?ably asserts that “the qualitative implications” of the argument 
according to which “the distinctive powers of internal organization are impaired and 
transactional diseconomies are incurred as ?rm size and the degree of vertical integration are 
progressively extended” “are not upset” (Williamson 1975, 117). But nowhere is it explained 
why they are not upset. Conversely, RBT understands the ?rm as an institution creating 
routines and knowledge dedicated to speci?c goods or services, yet confuses production of 
surplus value with creation of competitive advantage (which is supposed to be the source of 
rents or quasi-rents). Thus, according to this approach of the ?rm as a bundle of resources 
giving rise to organizational routines or speci?c knowledge, rents and quasi-rents arise as 
much from advantages drawn from market relations with its customers, suppliers, et cetera 
as from e?ciency of the production process or speci?city of the product. Strangely, each of 
these approaches fails to draw the boundaries of the ?rm clearly, being unable to distinguish 
adequately the ?rm from the market: TCE and PRT, because they bring the contractual 
nature of the speci?c market relation into the ?rm, even though PRT in particular admits the
co-operative nature of production; and RBT because it does not draw any clear distinction 
between the advantages of the ?rm drawn from its market relations and those resulting from 
the organization of production. 
By blurring the distinction between ?rm and market more than ever before, the 
business model of digital platforms has practically refuted the theoretical framework of 
TCE. Moreover, by overcoming the disadvantages of the putting-out system, digital platforms 
have shaken the two pillars underpinning the TCE approach and its vindication of the 
capitalist ?rm, namely information asymmetry and moral hazard (Williamson 1996). But 
digital platforms have also challenged the PRT according to which authority and hierarchy 
are the consequences of the residual control of non-human assets (Hart and Moore 1990). 
As we have seen, digital platforms do not need to exercise direct authority over workers and 
may control them through anonymous devices (software, consumer assessments, algorithms, 
et cetera). But if digital platforms may relax direct authority and control, they nevertheless 
share with all other kinds of capitalist ?rms the relation of production based on the property 
and use of non-human assets by capitalists who extract living labor in order to valorize 
these social means of production. Digital platforms have undermined employment relations 
based on wages but at the same time they have radicalized the relation of production on 
which is based wage labor, namely the private ownership of social and collective means of 
production. This relation of production suggests seeing the ?rm as a techno-institutional 
center of extraction of surplus labor. The focus on the private economic power on social 
production allows us to distinguish e?ectively between ?rm and market whatever is the form 
of hybridization between them. Moreover, it provides the necessary framework to account for 
di?erent forms of authority and control by relating them to the di?erent ways of extracting 
living labor and valorizing non-human assets.
Concluding Remarks
Since integration does not delimit the boundaries of the ?rm, solving the ?rm-boundary 
problem depends on a clear understanding of the nature and function of the ?rm. If we 
assume that labor is the source of the pro?ts made by the owners of the ?rm’s assets, all the 
features put to the fore by traditional theories (authority over employees in TCE, control of 
the use of ?rm’s assets by PRT, management of competencies, and knowledge by RBT) de?ne 
the ?rm as a techno-institutional center of labor appropriation, regardless of whether or 
not such appropriation is directly organized by the ?rm. De?ned as such, the capitalist ?rm 
includes digital platforms, where production of value is fragmented into a large number of 
individual provisions of services, since it frees the ?rm-boundary problem from governance 
constraints on transactions as well as organizational constraints on knowledge and resources, 
in the same way as ICTs have practically freed the ?rm from those same constraints. One 
may object that digital economics raises more transaction problems than any other industrial 
sectors. But the reduction of transaction costs made possible by ICTs does not justify anymore 
the hierarchical institution of the ?rm asserted by TCE. Moreover, what distinguishes digital 
platforms is that they cannot choose between integration and market, since their hybrid 
form derives from the very nature of the services they produce. In the same way, creation 
of organizational knowledge in digital platforms relies precisely on the decentralized and 
scattered nature of knowledge production by the many stakeholders of the digital platform. 
Thus, organizational resources are not limited to the resources created by the ?rm’s employees
but now extend to all the data produced by the workers and consumers and appropriated by 
the ?rm's software which interposes them. But whatever the reasons pushing ?rms to choose 
their forms of hybridization or their modes of organizational knowledge, they are always 
conditioned by the pursuit of the primary objective of the ?rm, namely the extraction of 
surplus labor or the valorization of social activity. Since digital platforms make pro?ts much 
like other capitalist ?rms by incorporating living labor to non-human assets, the typology 
of the ?rms and their organizational modes speci?c to contemporary capitalism could and 
should be made in accordance with the di?erent ways in which the connection between non-
human and human assets is made.
