Title:
Preferential Killing of Tetraploid Colon 
Cancer Cells by Targeting the Mitotic 
Kinase PLK1
Abstract:
Background/Aims: Chromosomal instability is a well-known factor in the progression of 
different types of cancer, including colorectal cancer. Chromosomal instability  results  in 
severely  rearranged  karyotypes  and aneuploidy.  Tetraploidy  constitutes  an  intermediate 
phase during the polyploidy/aneuploidy cascade  in oncogenesis, and tetraploid cells are 
particularly resistant to chemotherapy. Whether inhibition of the mitotic protein polo-like 
kinase 1 (PLK1) prevents the survival of tetraploid colon cancer cells is unknown. Methods: 
Diploid and tetraploid cells were transfected with siPLK1 or treated with PLK1 inhibitor Bi2536 
in combination with spindle poison. Cell toxicity was assessed via crystal violet staining and 
clonogenic assay. Flow cytometry assessment analyzed numerous cell apoptotic parameters 
and  cell  cycle  phases.  Synergistic  activity  between  Bi2536  and  paclitaxel,  vincristine  or 
colchicine was calculated using the CompuSyn software. Results: Inhibition or abrogation of 
PLK1 prevented the survival of colon cancer cells, specifically tetraploid cells. The cell death 
induced by PLK inhibition was due to mitotic slippage, followed by the activation of the intrinsic 
pathway of apoptosis. We further demonstrated that co-treatment of the tetraploid colon 
cancer cells with a PLK1 inhibitor and the microtubule polymerisation inhibitor vincristine or 
colchicine, but not the microtubule depolymerisation inhibitor paclitaxel, provoked a lethal 
synergistic effect. Conclusion: PLK1 inhibition together with microtubule-targeting chemicals, 
serve as a potent therapeutic strategy for targeting tetraploid cancer cells.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Introduction
 Results
 Preferential killing of tetraploid cells after PLK1 inhibition
 The PLK1 inhibition triggered the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway in tetraploid colon 
cancer cells
 Targeting PLK1 perturbed tetraploid cell cycle divisions
 Discussion
 Conclusion
 Author contributions statements


Text:
----------------------
Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers and a leading 
cause of death worldwide. CRC represents 10% of all diagnosed tumours in men and 9.2% in 
women, and its global incidence is estimated at 1.4 million cases annually, with 700,000 deaths 
in 2012. Moreover, the CRC incidence is expected to increase 60% by 2030, to more than 2.2 
million new cases and 1.1 million cancer deaths [1, 2]. Identifying an efficient treatment 
is thus crucial to reduce the CRC morbidity rates. One of the cancer hallmarks in general, 
and CRC in particular, is genomic instability. This phenomenon increases the probability of 
oncogenic events and creates a heterogeneous cell population with extensive abilities to 
adapt and evolve [3]. Tetraploidy is a state that can lead to aneuploidy and genomic instability 
[4-6]. Tetraploidy represents the condition of having twice as many chromosomes compared 
to their normal, diploid counterparts [7, 8]. Tetraploidy can arise from endoreplication (DNA 
replication without mitosis) [9], endomitosis (karyokinesis without cytokinesis) [10, 11] or 
aberrant cell fusion [12]. Tetraploid cells are frequently found in pre-neoplastic lesions of 
intestinal cancers [13-15].
The persistence of a tetraploid population is often correlated with the inactivation of 
tumour suppressors retinoblastoma 1 (RB1) and tumour protein p53 [5]. Inactivation of 
p53 facilitates the tetraploidisation of cell lines [16, 17]. Similarly, mutations that inactivate 
the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumour suppressor gene initiate a majority of 
colorectal cancers and result in tetraploidisation in vitro and in vivo [18]. Tetraploid cells 
are intrinsically resistant to genotoxic stress mediated by ionising irradiation or anti-cancer 
chemotherapeutic agents, including platinum compounds and topoisomerase inhibitors [19, 
20]. Thus, tetraploid cells might contribute to chemotherapeutic failure. The development 
of novel strategies to target tetraploid tumour cells can improve the treatment outcome for 
CRC patients.
PLK1 is a member of the polo-like kinase (PLK) family and mediates several key 
functions throughout mitosis, including bipolar arrangement of the centrosomes, the 
spindle assembly checkpoint and cytokinesis [21-23]. PLK1 is located in different subcellular 
compartments depending on its function. PLK1 is mostly cytoplasmic during the interphase. 
During early mitosis, PLK1 is accumulated at the spindle poles, then in the kinetochores for 
chromosomal alignment in the metaphase plate and concentrated in the cytokinetic bridge 
during cytokinesis [24, 25]. PLK1 expression levels are elevated in a range of different tumor 
types, including invasive breast carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and CRC [26]. PLK1 
can promote tumorigenesis in a myriad of ways. First, PLK1 can phosphorylate MDM2 or 
p53 and abrogate the p53 function. Second, PLK1 can increase the levels of the oncogenic 
transcription factor MYC in a positive feedback loop. Third, PLK1 overexpression leads to 
degradation of the tumour suppressor repressor element-1 (RE-1) silencing transcription 
(REST) in triple negative breast cancer. Fourth, mainly in hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatitis 
B can stimulate PLK1 activation, an action that leads to the repression of several transcription 
factors, including SUZ12 and ZNF198. Finally, PLK1 can also inhibit the tumour suppressor 
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and thus indirectly activate the oncogenic 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway [27].
Here, we report that PLK1 inhibition leads to the selective destruction of tetraploid 
cancer cells. In addition, we provide a complete characterisation of the pro-apoptotic signal 
transduction pathway provoked by PLK1 inhibition and the benefit of using a combination 
treatment with anti-microtubule polymerisation agents.
Results
Preferential killing of tetraploid cells after PLK1 inhibition
To evaluate the differential impact of PLK1 knockdown on the survival of tetraploid and 
diploid colon cancer cells, we utilised previously generated 2n and 4n clones derived from 
parental human colon carcinoma RKO cells [29]. The diploid and tetraploid clones were 
transfected with an unrelated small interfering RNA (siUNR) as a control and a SMARTpool 
siPLK1 (siPLK1a), to knockdown PLK1, for up to 72 h (Fig. 1A). The cells were fixed and 
stained with propidium iodide (PI) to assess with flow cytometry the cell cycle distribution 
and the proportion of the hypodiploid (subG1) fraction, a hallmark of cell death (Fig. 1B). 
Compared to their diploid counterparts, tetraploid clones were particularly sensitive to 
PLK1 knockdown. In order to avoid any off-target activity of the siPLK1a, we used two 
additional siRNA: siPLK1b and siPLK1c. The knockdown efficiency for the three siRNAs 
was evaluated using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 48 h post-transfection 
(Fig. 1C). We performed a proliferation assay using crystal violet and found that tetraploid 
cells were more sensitive to PLK1 knockdown compared to their diploid counterpart (Fig. 
1D-F). To further confirm our finding, the cells were transfected with siPLK1a, b or c and 
evaluated cell death after 72 h by co-staining with the vital dye propidium iodide (PI) and the 
mitochondrial transmembrane potential (? ? m) sensor DiOC6(3). The PI cell incorporation 
shows loss of cell membrane integrity and in consequence cell death ((DiOC6(3) low PI 
high), while loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (DiOC6(3)low PI low) is a sign 
of early stage apoptosis. The frequency of (DiOC6(3) low PI low) and (DiOC6(3)low PI high) 
cells analyzed by flow cytometry was indeed higher in tetraploid comparatively to diploid 
cells (Fig. 1G-H). The cell death mediated by PLK1 knockdown in tetraploid cells was also 
confirmed using human colon carcinoma HCT116 (Supplementary Fig. S1A-B) and sarcoma 
cells (Supplementary Fig. S2A – for all supplemental material see www.cellphysiolbiochem.
com).
Next, we focused on small molecule PLK1inhibitors to assess a potentially alternative 
treatment option to target PLK1 for cancer therapy. We decided to focus on drugs that are 
already in clinical trials (Table 1). We performed a kinase-drug interaction network using 
the STRING plugin, which is related to the Cytoscape software [30], to extract the half 
maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) sensitivity of PLK1 of the listed drugs in Table 1 
(Supplementary Fig. S3A-B). Among all the enumerated molecules, Bi2536 and GSK461364 
showed the highest potency to inhibit PLK1 based on the IC50 values (Supplementary Fig. 
S3B). We utilised the KINOMEscan library, an online biochemical kinase profiling assay that 
measures drug binding using a panel of 309 purified kinases (https://lincs.hms.harvard.
edu/kinomescan/). Based on the values obtained from the KINOMEscan library using
Bi2536 and GSK461364 at 10 ?M, we generated a heatmap of the drugs’ specificity. The 
results for each inhibitor are reported as “pe rcent of control”, where the control is dimethyl 
sulphoxide (DMSO). A value of 100% indicate d no inhibition of kinase binding to the ligand 
in the presence of Bi2536 or GSK461364, while a low percent indicated strong inhibition.
Since Bi2536 was more specific for PLK1 c ompared to GSK461364 (Supplementary Fig. 
S3C), we decided to continue our investigatio n on tetraploid cells using Bi2536.
We initially performed a concentration dependent proliferation assay using crystal 
violet. The tetraploid cells showed a highe r sensitivity against Bi2536-treatment after 
24–72 h compared to diploid cells (Fig. 2A-C). The major differences in the Bi2536 was 
observed after 72 h (Fig. 2C). Tetraploid RKO cells treated with Bi2536 were more cytotoxic 
measuring the subG1 cell population compa red to diploid cells (Fig. 2D). Moreover, using
flow cytometry-mediated measurement of PI and DiOC6(3), tetraploid cells showed a higher 
sensitivity when treated with 5, 10 or 50 nM Bi2536 compared to diploid cells (Fig. 2E). 
Consistently, Bi2536 significantly reduced th e clonogenic potential of tetraploid compared 
to diploid cells, either with continuous 5 nM Bi2536 treatment (75.3 +/- 25 diploid vs 4.3 +/- 
3 tetraploid) or after 24 h drug washout (21 7 +/- 37 diploid vs 148 +/- 35 tetraploid) (Fig. 
2F-G). The preferential toxicity of the Bi2536 to tetraploid cells was also confirmed using the 
human colon carcinoma HCT116 (Supplementary Fig. S1C-D) and sarcoma (Supplementary
Fig. S2B) cells lines. Taken together, these findings demonstrated that targeting PLK1 
represents an efficient strategy to preferentia lly kill tetraploid colon cancer cells.
The PLK1 inhibition triggered the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway in tetraploid colon 
cancer cells
To characterise the cell death pathwa y engaged after PLK1 inhibition, tetraploid 
RKO colon cancer cells were treated for 72 h with DMSO (as a control) or 10 nM Bi2536. 
Cell death was evaluated by flow-cytometr y-mediated measurement of well-recognised 
apoptotic parameters [31], including phosphatidylserine (PS) surface exposure using 
Annexin V staining (Fig. 3A), dissipation of the mitochondrial inner transmembrane potential 
(??m) with the sensitive dye DiOC6(3) (Fig. 3B), examining the intracellular calcium (Ca2+) 
concentration with the Fluo-3/AM dye (Fig. 3C) and caspase-3 cleavage with an appropriate
antibody (Fig. 3D). Moreover, the co-treatment of the cells with the broad-spectrum caspase 
inhibitor Z-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone (Z-VAD-fmk) significantly reduced the death of 
tetraploid cells that responded to PLK1 inhibition (Fig. 3E). Further confirming the role of 
caspases in the execution of apoptosis, tetraploid cells that responded to Bi2536 manifested 
the apoptosis-associated cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) (Fig. 3F). These 
results indicated that PLK1 inhibition triggers the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in tetraploid 
colon cancer cells.
P53 is the most frequently mutated gene in human cancers [32]. Moreover, p53 is the 
major mediator of the cellular response to stress, and it stimulates the execution of apoptosis 
via the transactivation of several proapoptotic genes [33]. Thus, we investigated the effect 
of p53 inhibition when PLK1 was knocked down or inhibited by treating the tetraploid RKO 
cells with cyclic pifithrin-? (PFT-?), a pharmacological antagonist of p53 [34], in the presence 
of siPLK1 (Fig. 3G) and with Bi2536 co-treatment (Fig. 3H). Cell death was assessed by flow 
cytometry by co-staining with the mitochondrial inner transmembrane potential (??m) 
sensitive dye DiOC6(3) and the vital dye PI. This procedure identifies dying cells (DiOC6(3)
low PI?) and dead (PI+) cells. The loss of p53 function conferred a death resistance to the 
treatment (Fig. 3G-H). To investigate the effect of PLK1 inhibition on necroptosis induction, 
the cells were co-treated with 10 nM Bi2536 and 100 ?M of the necroptosis inhibitor 
necrostatin-1. There was no protective effect after co-staining with DiOC6(3) and PI, a finding 
that excluded any role of PLK1 inhibition to induce regulated necrosis (Fig. 3I).
Targeting PLK1 perturbed tetraploid cell cycle divisions
When analysing cell cycle profiles using flow cytometry after staining fixed cells with 
the DNA dye PI, we observed that inhibition or depletion of PLK1 perturbed the diploid
and tetraploid cell cycle progression. We excluded the subG1 population to focus on the 
proliferative cells (Fig. 4A). Compared to the control conditions, the cells were blocked 
in G2/M phase after 24 h treatment. Some cells underwent mitotic slippage and became 
hyper-diploid and hyper-tetraploid, respectively. (Hyperploidy is shown in the figure as DNA 
content > 4n and > 8n for diploid and tetraploid clones, respectively). Notably, the fraction of 
hyperploidisation induced by PLK1 inhibition was higher in tetraploid compared to diploid 
cells (Fig. 4B). Indeed, the diploid cells stayed in the G2/M phase longer than tetraploid cells, 
and approximately 15% of the cells became hyper-diploid after 72 h. However, tetraploid 
cells executed mitotic slippage earlier; the hyperploid fraction was approximately 16% at 
24 h and reached 32% at 72 h. These findings suggest that the anti-tetraploid effect of PLK1 
inhibition came from the relative inability of tetraploid (as compared to diploid) cells to 
tolerate any further increase in ploidy. Targeting PLK1 preferentially kills tetraploid colon 
cancer cells by triggering an uncontrolled and lethal hyperploidisation programme, followed 
by a mitotic catastrophe executed by the intrinsic apoptotic pathway.
PLK1 and tubulin polymerisation inhibitors synergistically induced apoptosis in tetraploid 
colon cancer cells
Given that PLK1 inhibition induced mitotic catastrophe and polyploidy after a long 
arrest in the mitotic phase, we asked whether the combination of PLK1 inhibition with a 
microtubule poison could promote any synergistic effects concerning cells death in tetraploid 
colon cancer cells. To address this question, we used different classes of microtubules 
poisons, including paclitaxel as a tubulin depolymerisation inhibitor and vincristine or 
colchicine as tubulin polymerisation inhibitors. We found a concentration dependent cell 
survival in tetraploid cells. (Fig. 5A, 5C and Supplementary Fig. S4A). The combination of 
Bi2536 and paclitaxel did not result in any synergistic activity (Supplementary Fig. S4B-C
Discussion
In this study, we proposed a novel 
strategy for targeting tetraploid colon 
cancer cells based on the abrogation 
of the mitotic kinase PLK1. By using 
tumour cells that display distinct levels 
of ploidy (diploid and tetraploid), we 
showed that the depletion or inhibition 
of PLK1 effectively and preferentially 
killed tetraploid colon cancer cells via 
mitotic catastrophe and the activation 
of a mitochondrial- and caspase-
dependent apoptosis. The cell death 
mechanism occurred after a G2/M 
block, followed by mitotic slippage and 
polyploidy. In addition, we provided 
evidence that the combination of 
PLK1 inhibition with microtubule 
polymerisation inhibitors (vincristine 
or colchicine) induced significant 
synergetic cell death (Fig. 6).
PLK1 is the most investigated member of the PLK serine/threonine protein kinases 
family [24, 27]. During the cell cycle, PLK1 controls, among others, mitotic entry and the 
G2/M checkpoint, coordinates the centrosome cycle, regulates the chromosome segregation, 
plays multiple functions at the spindle midzone, participates in abscission and is involved 
in cytokinesis [24, 25, 35, 36]. In the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database (https://tcga-
data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/), PLK1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression is significantly higher in 
tumour compared to normal tissue (across 24 different types of cancers). In comparison 
to other cancer types, colorectal cancer exhibits high PLK1 expression [26]. Moreover, a 
previous study showed that upregulated PLK1 expression correlates with inferior survival 
outcomes in patients with rectal cancer [37]. PLK1 overexpression induces chromosomal 
instability [38], a finding that places this kinase as a promising antineoplastic target for 
cancers with a high level of genomic instability, especially colorectal tumours.
The Bi2536 inhibitor is the most commonly molecule used in the characterisation of 
PLK1 function and anticancer activity [39]. Bi2536 is a well-tolerated inhibitor with potent 
efficacy in vivo, in several well-established xenograft models [40]. Moreover, Bi2536 was 
included in a completed phase II clinical trial for patients with solid tumours, including 
non-small cell lung, pancreatic or hormone-refractory prostate cancer (clinicaltrials.gov, 
NCT00376623, NCT00706498, NCT00412880 and NCT00710710). However, we have not 
identified any PLK1 inhibitor that has entered the chemotherapeutic market.
In our experimental model, either depletion or chemical inhibition of PLK1 provoked 
apoptosis in both diploid and tetraploid colon cells. However, tetraploid cells showed 
higher sensitivity when PLK1 was targeted. Tetraploid cell death was executed via the 
intrinsic apoptotic pathway, as demonstrated by the loss of mitochondrial transmembrane 
potential (??m), accumulation of intracellular calcium, activation of caspase-3 and PARP, 
DNA degradation, cell scrambling, phosphatidylserine (PS) exposure and, ultimately, the 
loss of plasma membrane integrity. The mitochondrial dysfunction, measured by the loss 
of the mitochondrial membrane potential, provokes a mitochondrial Ca2+ homeostasis 
perturbation. This leads to elevated cytosolic Ca2 concentration ([Ca2+]c), which is followed 
by the release of mitochondrial apoptotic factors, including cytochrome c, apoptosis 
inducing factor (AIF) and procaspase-9, into the cytosol [41]. The PLK1 inhibition perturbed 
cell mitosis and provoked instead mitotic catastrophe. This in turn facilitated a bona fide 
intrinsic oncosuppressive mechanism that by sensing mitotic failure, executed cell death via 
the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis.
What is the mechanism through which PLK1 inhibition is particularly lethal for tetraploid 
cells? To answer this question, we monitored the cell cycle status upon PLK1 inhibition. This 
inhibition prolonged G2/M arrest in diploid cells for up to 72 h, followed by mitotic slippage 
for approximately 15% of the cell population. The tetraploid cells responded similarly, but 
with completely different kinetics. The length of the G2/M arrest was significantly shorter, 
and the polyploid population reached almost 30% 48 h post-PLK1 inhibition. It appeared that 
tetraploid cells death upon PLK1 inhibition was caused by excessive genome reduplication 
and consequent hyperploidy as well as their incapacity to support accumulation of additional 
DNA content.
Our findings are consistent with previous studies showing that the high sensitivity 
of tetraploid cells to the inhibition of mitotic key effectors, especially those with a direct 
interaction with microtubules. Inhibition of the protein kinase Aurora B preferentially 
kills tetraploid compared to diploid hepatocellular carcinoma cells, but it also shows a 
similar effect on untransformed tetraploid vs diploid mouse fibroblasts. This effect is due 
to a cytokinesis failure, consequent massive polyploidy and subsequent mitotic catastrophe 
[42]. Aurora B interacts with a key kinase of the SAC, namely MPS1 [43-45]. MPS1 inhibition 
sensitises the tetraploid colon cancer cells also via the activation of the mitotic catastrophe 
following a polyploid/aneuploid cascade [46, 47]. It is important to note that PLK1 and MPS1 
cooperatively regulate the SAC [48]. The protein kinase CHK1 is an important component of 
DNA damage pathway; however, it also plays an essential role in the SAC function via the 
activation of Aurora B and MAD2 [49]. CHK1 loss leads to chromosome misalignment and 
lagging chromosomes and thus preferential killing of tetraploid colon cancer cells [50]. Other 
players involved in microtubule dynamics and essentially centrosome separation and pole 
formation are kinesin Eg5 and the protein motor HSET. The inhibition/depletion of these 
proteins also sensitises and preferentially kills tetraploid compared to diploid colon cancer 
cells after mitotic catastrophe activation [51, 52]. We must emphasise that not all the SAC 
components or important players of the microtubule dynamics can preferentially sensitise 
the tetraploid cancer cells. The inhibition of Aurora A, an important kinase for centrosome 
maturation, mitotic spindle formation and cytokinesis, does not kill tetraploid hepatocellular 
carcinoma [42, 53].
Drug combinations are particularly important in the modern era of chemotherapy; 
they offer the advantage of synergistic antitumor activity at relatively low concentrations 
of each drug and reduce side effects and additive toxicity. Moreover, compound synergy 
might overcome the drug resistance of certain tumours, including cancers that harbour 
chromosomal instability and particularly tetraploidy, which is highly correlated with drug 
resistance and a poor patient prognosis [20, 54-56]. Due to the key role of PLK1 in several 
cell cycle processes, including centrosome maturation, bipolar spindle formation and 
kinetochore-microtubule attachment, we asked whether there is a lethal interaction between 
PLK1 inhibition and microtubule-destabilising drugs to induce apoptosis. There are two 
types of microtubule poisons widely used in chemotherapy: microtubule depolymerisation 
and polymerisation inhibitors [57, 58]. Paclitaxel (commonly named Taxol) is the most 
utilised microtubule depolymerisation inhibitor in preclinical and clinical models [59]. 
Microtubule polymerisation inhibitors, including vincristine from the Vinca alkaloid group 
[60] and the colchicine from the Colchicine group, are more diverse [61].
We found that co-treatment with a low dose of the PLK1 inhibitor Bi2536 and paclitaxel 
did not induce any synergistic lethality in tetraploid colon cancer cells. On the other hand, 
co-treatment of a low dose of the PLK1 inhibitor Bi2536 and a low dose of either vincristine 
or colchicine induced strong synergistic toxicity in tetraploid colon cancer cells. These 
findings are consistent with previous studies that employed vincristine in combination with 
PLK1 inhibitors for the treatment of various solid tumours and haematological malignancies 
[62-67]. Our study is the first report to use colchicine as an effective treatment strategy in 
combination with PLK1 inhibition.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this novel approach to exploit PLK1 inhibitors and microtubule poisons 
constitutes a promising therapeutic strategy based on mitotic catastrophe for colon cancer.
Author contributions statements
MJ developed the concepts and performed experiments. CK performed the bio-
informatics work and statistical analysis. SSS performed experiments. MJ and RM analyzed 
data and wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
