Title:
Computer Communications
Abstract:
Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is a modern paradigm that provides a platform for implementing reliable,
centrally managed, and automated security solutions for conventional and new generation networks, such as
IoT, cloud computing, 5G/6G mobile communication networks, and vehicular communications. In these com-
plex systems, manual security operations can delay or obstruct the identification, mitigation, and prevention
of ever-increasing sophisticated threats. Thus, the idea of security automation for networks using the SDN
paradigm has become fundamental, given that SDN was created to facilitate the operation and management
of complex networks with minimal human intervention, which is considered error-prone. This survey studies
the state-of-the-art research efforts concerned with security automation in SDN environments. We identified
and ranked various classes of security solutions with different levels of automation and complexity. The level
of automation is measured using four well-defined qualitative parameters: self-healing, self-adaptation, self-
configuration, and self-optimization. The complexity is characterized by the amount of processing and storage
resources and implementation requirements. This work represents the first endeavor to analyze the level of
automation and complexity of security solutions in SDN environments. Our findings reveal important advances
in the area of security automation in SDN. However, there are still several open problems and challenges, which
we detail in this work.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 1. Introduction
Security demands in new complex and dynamic networks, such as
IoT [1–4], cloud computing [5], 5G/6G communication networks[6,7],
and vehicular communications, [8,9], in addition to the increasing
number of sophisticated and intelligent attacks, are key motivating
factors for deploying automated defense solutions for networks using
the Software-Defined Networking (SDN) technology. On the one hand,
key networking trends place an increasing burden on systems and
network administrators. These trends include an increase in network
traffic volume, the virtualization of servers, storage, and networking
devices, the growth in size and complexity of data centers, and the
growth of cloud computing and IoT applications. In this context, the
Information Technology (IT) workforce becomes a significant security
bottleneck. This workforce cannot manage the vastly increasing num-
ber of incidents and alerts and the need to deploy optimized security
controls in response. Manual procedures result in slower detection
and remediation of issues, mistakes in resource configuration, and
erratic security policy implementation, leaving systems vulnerable to
compliance issues and threats.
On top of that, advanced security skills are in higher demand
than ever before; however, there is a significant lack of qualified and
skilled security professionals. An estimated 3.5 million cybersecurity
jobs will be available but unfilled by 2021 [10]. In addition, existing
cybersecurity staff is overworked and not set up for 24x7x365 incom-
ing threats [11]. According to the CISCO Cybersecurity Report Series
2020 [12], from a survey of 2800 organizations around 13 countries,
40% of these were receiving 5000 daily alerts. This overwhelming
number of alerts is having an impact onsecurity administrators’ fatigue.
As a result, according to a report presented by the Enterprise Strategy
Group [13], IT teams ignore about 74% of security threat alerts, even
when they have security solutions in place, due to the sheer volume.
On the other hand, agile and sophisticated threats are rising, such as
the Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) [14]. Different from common
cyber-attacks, APTs focus on large organizations and industry sectors,
causing severe damage, such as failure of essential services and destruc-
tion of critical infrastructure. These attacks usually become undetected,
and the damage caused can be critical [15]. Among the most frequent,
sophisticated, and dangerous APTs are DDoS attacks. According to a
Kaspersky report [16], the number of DDoS attacks in 2020 almost
doubled the number of DDoS attacks of 2019. APTs can cause huge
capital and reputational losses to the victims. Indeed, the World Eco-
nomic Forum detected that cyberattacks are perceived as the #2 global
risk of concern to business leaders in advanced economies [17].
Including automation in the heart of network security management
will help to deal with the increasing number of alerts and skilled IT
administrators’ shortages. Security automation is the machine-based
execution of security actions to programmatically detect, investigate,
mitigate, and prevent threats timely and efficiently with minimal hu-
man intervention. With this automation, repetitive and time-consuming
activities are taken out of the hands of the IT workforce so they can
focus on more relevant value-adding work.
Security automation can reduce the average cost of a breach by
95% [18]. Therefore, most organizations plan to increase automation
to simplify and speed up response times in their security ecosystems.
According to Gartner, security automation is one of the top security
and risk management trends [19]. The execution of automated security
tasks is much faster than human interactions and generates fewer
errors.
SDN is enabling security managers to bridge the response resource
gap through intelligent incident detection and automated response.
SDN decouples the control plane from the network devices and logically
centralizes the administration of network resources. This networking
technology presents new security challenges for network designers and
operators, but it also provides a platform for implementing reliable,
centrally managed, and automated security solutions for networks.
Although many surveys have already studied intelligent meth-
ods applied in SDN-based security solutions, none have comprehen-
sively analyzed and compared the complexity and level of automation
achieved with these techniques. The idea of security automation in
SDN environments is fundamental since this technology was created
to facilitate network operation and management with minimal human
intervention, which is considered error-prone.
Network automation has been studied from different perspectives
and defined using terms such as cognitive, self-managing, or self-aware
networks [20–22]. The common characteristics of these definitions are
the ability to think, learn, and remember. Therefore, an automated
network can adapt in response to conditions or events based on the
reasoning and prior knowledge it has obtained. Moreover, an auto-
mated network can be characterized by its ability to complete its
tasks autonomously by using its self-properties, namely, self-healing,
self-adaptation, self-configuration, and self-optimization, to adapt dy-
namically to changing requirements while considering the end-to-end
goals [22].
In this paper, we survey existing research efforts related to the
automation of security in SDN-based networks, using peer-reviewed
studies published in the last seven years (2015–2021).
The security solutions reviewed are divided into two main classes,
namely reactive and proactive solutions. On one hand, reactive security
solutions (also known as detection/mitigation solutions) are based on
different Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled techniques such as Ma-
chine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), and Reinforcement Learning
(RL) with online or offline model learning. The methods of AI have
been used to discover threats in networks [23–25] since they are
considered as robust potential solutions to make networks self-aware,
self-adaptive, self-secured, self-healing, and self-managed [26,27]. The
study of SDN-based reactive security solutions requires an analysis of
the characteristics that makes detection and mitigation mechanisms
adaptive to changes in the network. On the other hand, proactive
security solutions use emerging concepts such as Network Function Vir-
tualization, Moving Target Defense, Cyber Deception, Network Slicing,
and Blockchain to secure the SDN architecture effectively. Proactive
defense methods focus on evade/prevent attacks or on reducing the
attack surfaces in the network. We evaluate the level of automa-
tion, of reactive and proactive solutions, in terms of their complexity
level with respect to their implementation, and their self-* properties
(self-healing, self-adaptation, self-configuration, and self-optimization).
The contributions of this work are:
 1.1. Existing surveys
 1.2. Survey organization
 2. An overview of SDN
SDN is a new networking paradigm where forwarding hardware
is decoupled from control decisions. SDN provides new networking
capabilities: dynamic network programming, centralized network mon-
itoring, network virtualization, among others.
Fig. 1 shows the general architecture of SDN. It has three planes: the
data plane (DP), the control plane (CP), and the application plane (AP).
The DP contains forwarding devices that forward, drop, and modify
packets based on policies received from the CP. The CP programs the
network resources, updates forwarding rules dynamically, and makes
network administration flexible and agile. The AP contains applications
which according to the business requirements, can implement the con-
trol logic to change the network behavior. Examples of applications are
Network Virtualization, Security in Networks, Mobility Management,
and Network Monitoring.
Three interfaces are present in the SDN architecture. The south-
bound interface (SBI), defined between the DP and the CP, permits
monitoring and notifies network events from the DP to the CP. Also,
 2.1. State of development of SDN technology
 3. Defense automation in SDN-based networks
Network security automation is a prominent area of study and
is expected to be solved by modern network architectures, such as
SDN. We noticed different methods presented in the literature that
pursue the automation of defending networks using SDN and intelli-
gent techniques. To review such techniques, we divided the security
solutions into two main classes: reactive and proactive. Fig. 2 shows
the proposed classification analyzed in the following sections. Reactive
or detection-based security solutions use different techniques, includ-
ing Statistics, Machine Learning, Deep Learning, and Reinforcement
Learning to detect and mitigate attacks. Proactive solutions prevent
attacks by leveraging techniques such as Moving Target Defense, Net-
work Function Virtualization, Cyber Deception, Network Slicing, and
Blockchain technology.
Each subclass of defense strategy requires a different level of com-
plexity (computation, storage, and implementation), also in order to
achieve different levels of automation (Fig. 2). The level of automation
of the classes can be assessed as a function of their self-* capabili-
ties [22]:
 4. SDN-based reactive defense
 4.1. Threat detection based on statistics
The SDN paradigm has high computation capabilities in the con-
troller, which allows the implementation of advanced and effective
methods to detect attacks. Specific attacks, such as DDoS, have been
intensely studied, and their typical behavior can be used to detect them
quickly. For instance, in an exploitation DDoS attack [49], many widely
distributed zombies can attack a host, a segment of the network, or
a service, by flooding the target with packets to exhaust the victims’
bandwidth or resources. Such a DDoS attack can be detected by regis-
tering thenumber of packetsdirected to anIP destination and analyzing
this information.
Two methods widely used to characterize flows in networks and
analyze suspicious behaviors are entropy and wavelet transform. The
entropy is a measure of uncertainty of a variable that allows measuring
the information gain. The acquisition of information corresponds to the
reduction in entropy. Entropy has been extensively used for anomaly
detection since it enables the detection of changes in traffic distribution
of several attacks [50–52]. For instance, during a DDoS attack on a
specific service, there is a significant decrease in the destination IP and
port entropy [53]. During a Port Scan attack, the attacker sends probe
packets to a wide range of ports in a specific host to find available ser-
vices. In this case, a significant decrease in the source port entropy can
 4.2. Model-based attack detection with offline adaptation
Model-based methods learn the behavior of a network using histor-
ical data, including attacks and non-attack events. These models are
trained once and then used to detect attacks. That is, these methods
learn the system’s behavior offline. Fig. 3 shows the workflow of the
offline learning attack detection approach.
Offline learning is necessary given the high dynamics of networks.
On unexpected and extreme network changes, the models being in use
to detect attacks will require updating through offline retraining to
adapt to the new network’s behavior.
Offline learning methods include ML-based and DL-based attack
detection methods.
4.2.1. ML-based attack detection
Many proposals have demonstrated that SDN architecture is suitable
to deploy ML algorithms given the higher computational resources in
the CP and the global visibility of the network in real-time. Many
surveys revealed that almost all ML techniques were explored jointly
with SDN technology to detect complex network attacks [24–26,36–38,
40,42]. Therefore, we decided not to do redundant work by reviewing
all those works. Instead, we analyze how recent ML methods support
detecting attacks in SDN networks.
Fig. 4 shows the most used ML methods to implement SDN-security
solutions: Support Vector Machine (SVM) [57–59], ?-Nearest Neighbors
(KNN) [60,61], Random Forest (RF) [56], Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) [62], Fuzzy Logic [63], and Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [64,
65]. Most of ML-based security solutions focus on Network/Transport
Layer (L3/L4) DDoS attacks, which are high-volume attacks and easier
to detect. Application Layer DDoS attacks that are harder to detect are
also solved using ML methods.
Other less common model-based mechanisms based on intelligent
strategies use feature-pattern graph model [66], Holt Winter for Digital
Signature System (HWDS) [67], catastrophe theory [68], and time-
series data mining (e.g., ARIMA) [69]. The methods achieve accuracy
above 90% on DDoS attack detection.
Even though most ML methods provide high accuracy in detecting
threats (Fig. 4), they still lack a fundamental factor that could limit
their implementation in production networks, namely the scalabil-
ity. Most of the ML-based solutions have been tested using security
datasets or small test networks. Therefore, the complexity of these
techniques is not optimized. This shortage could bring critical problems
when implementing these systems in production environments, such as
unacceptable delays.
4.2.2. DL-based attack detection
DL algorithms are capable of automatically finding correlations in
a high volume of data. For that reason, DL-based techniques have
been used in the last years to detect complex attacks on networks.
Several surveys have studied the application of DL for attack detection
in SDNs [36–38]. Therefore, we decided not to do redundant work by
reviewingall those works. Instead, we explore the most recent DL-based
attack detection proposals.
Fig. 4 shows the application of DL methods to attack detection.
The most common DL methods explored are Deep Belief Propagation
(DBP) [70], Stacked Auto Encoder (SAE) [71,72], Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [73], Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) neural network
[74], Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network [75,76], and
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) neural network [77,78]. These methods
demonstrate high accuracy in detecting L3/L4 DDoS attacks. Most in-
terestingly, DL helps to detect complex APTs, namely, application-layer
DDoS attacks, with high accuracy.
It is noticeable that DL allows higher accuracy than ML in detecting
attacks (Fig. 4). However, DL requires more computation and storage
capabilities, which may limit the scalability of the proposed methods.
 4.3. Model-based attack detection with online adaptation
As networks are constantly evolving, detection models with online
adaptation can be appropriate strategies to timely follow the network
dynamics, thus increasing the detection rate, minimizing the FP rate,
and reducing the detection time.
To better understand the necessity of the detection model adap-
tation, we present the concept drift in the following. Consider ?, the
input features, and ?, the output variables of a system to be modeled.
According to the Bayesian decision theory, a classification can be
described with the equation,
where, ?(?) = ??
In dynamically changing and non-stationary environments, the sys-
tem behavior can change over time. The changes in the system may
affect the probability distribution of the input data ?(?), the prior prob-
abilities of the classes ?(?), the class conditional probabilities ?(?|?),
and as a result, the posterior probabilities of classes ?(?|?), affecting
the prediction [80]. These variations over time of the distribution
probabilities are known as the phenomenon of concept drift.
Computer networks are dynamic and non-stationary environments
where the concept drift is present. Therefore, threat detection models
need to have mechanisms to adapt to evolving data over time. Other-
wise, their performance will degrade. These models must be updated
with the new data distribution or be replaced to meet the changed
situation.
Online learning strategies can be adequate to deal with the concept
drift since they process data sequentially. These strategies can produce
a model with a partial training dataset, and the model is continu-
ously updated during the operation as more information arrives. Fig. 5
shows the general structure of online adaptive learning that can effec-
tively prevent the concept drift, according to [80]. The online learning
procedure has the following steps:
In this structure, a Memory module defines how and which data is
presented to the Learning module. The Loss Estimation module tracksthe
performance of the learning algorithm. It also sends information to the
Change Detection module to update the model if required. For details of
each component in this architecture, please refer to [80].
From the implementation perspective, as model adaptation is on-
line, it is necessary to consider the SDN controller processing ca-
pabilities. Moreover, the initial model can be trained offline, using
historical data, and loaded into the SDN controller. Subsequently, the
mechanisms of online adaptation will update the model using measures
gathered from the network. In general, we assume that online learning
mechanisms are unsupervised since there is no immediate and direct
feedback about the model decisions. Therefore, anomaly detection
mechanisms presented in the literature [81] are in the category of
model-based attack detection with online adaptation, as long as they
update the model according to network variations. In this way, unsu-
pervised and adaptive ML/DL methods are in the category presented in
this section.
For instance, work in [82] presents an online learning algorithm
to detect Heavy Hitters (HH) in SDN networks. HH are entities whose
number of network elements is at least a specific fraction of the total
number of network elements (e.g., flows whose volumes are larger
than certain thresholds). This study detects heavy traffic. A model
receives flows collected from the switches. A market list ? contains
HHs historically identified. The online learning mechanism maps every
incoming flow to a network state (? = 0 for HH and ? = 1 for normal
network activity) according to its bytes and weights changes. The
weights and thresholds in ? are pre-defined by the administrator based
on the characteristics of the flow and a historical dataset. The network
state feedbacks on the market list ?. The OF protocol gathers statistics
from the DP. To reduce the overhead of gathering flow information
of the switches, the controller decides how to change the period of
collecting statistics and sends coarse-grained or fine-grained rules to
the switch as a zoom-out or zoom-in of existing rules. The evaluation
of this proposal, based on detection accuracy, detection time, and
communication overhead, demonstrates its effectiveness.
Although we can find several studies that propose online unsu-
pervised learning attack detection (anomaly detection), the incursion
on developing comprehensive online learning mechanisms to detect
attacks on networks leveraging the SDN technology is limited. A com-
plete online detection method should solve the concept drift, explained
before, using a structure similar to that shown in Fig. 5. The limited
 4.4. Reinforcement learning for threat mitigation
Reactive solutions require a mitigation part after an attack has been
detected. Blocking or dropping malicious traffic is the most basic miti-
gation strategy [56,59,63,67,83–85], and it assumes an attack detection
performance of 100%. However, even complex DL-based solutions
cannot achieve such perfection in detecting attacks. Moreover, other
mitigation strategies have been proposed, such as delaying suspicious
traffic [86–88] or redirecting the suspicious traffic to Network Pro-
cessor Units (NPUs) such as deep packet inspection (DPI) modules
for deeper traffic analysis [62,89]. These approaches are intended
to reduce the effect of legitimate traffic affected by false positives.
However, in these solutions, attackers still use part of the network
resources.
A need arose for a defense system that would not only detect an
intrusion on time but also would make the most optimal real-time
crisis-action decision on how the network security policy should be
modified to mitigate the threat. Thus, mitigation solutions based on
Reinforcement Learning (RL) have been proposed.
In the RL paradigm, software agents automatically define the ideal
behavior within a specific context by continually making value judg-
ments to select good actions over bad [90]. In a typical RL model, an
agent monitors the environment via perception. It also takes actions
within the environment, via an actuator, which could change the
state of the environment. At each time step, the agent receives an
observational input reflecting the state ? of the environment. In turn,
it can take an action ? that transfers the state of the network into a
new state ??. This is conveyed to the agent, along with a reinforcement
signal ?, indicating the value and desirability of the action held [91].
Attack mitigation proposals configure certain states, action-sets,
and rewards to implement the RL to automate the attack mitigation
[90,92–94]. Work in [91] proposed a unified general scheme for de-
signing complex and adaptive RL agents for the network threat mitiga-
tion task. This proposal is able to automate the mitigation of complex
attacks, such as APT.
RL-based mitigation strategies still face critical practical obstacles.
Low sample efficiency and reward function specification are possi-
bly the biggest obstacles to applying RL algorithms. Other critical
shortcomings of RL are:
 4.5. Adversarial learning
All defense proposals studied previously unrealistically assume that
the attackers are not aware of the defense mechanisms. However, once
deployed these implementations in production networks, intelligent
and adaptive adversaries may violate the initial assumption of the AI
techniques. The commoditization of ML tools can enable attackers to
perform many experiments to identify how to use them for malicious
purposes. Also, the use of public datasets on security model training
is a problem because attackers could use the information to create a
strategy for poisoning training data, known as adversarial samples.
Most ML methods are sensitive to adversarial samples, e.g., regres-
sion models, SVM, DT, RF, NN, and KNN. In addition, work in [95]
demonstrated that adversarial attacks have a relatively high impact on
different DL-based detections, such as (MLP), CNN, and LSTM, resulting
in a reduction of the detection accuracy and increasing the training
time. Even adaptive techniques, such as RL, can be affected by Adver-
sarial Machine Learning (AML) methods. Authors in [96] demonstrated
two ways of how AML can affect RL-based defense performance: (1) the
AML applies a perturbation to the state observed by the target so that
the agent chooses a different action as the optimal, and (2) the AML
corrupts the reward function, so the direction towards the loss function
minimization is perturbed, which results in delayed optimal policy im-
plementation. The study showed that even these simple attacks might
cause RL agents to take suboptimal actions. The authors suggested that
simple solution ideas such as adding a 5% error to the reward signal in
free attack periods can help the agent learn optimal actions, although
some delay is maintained.
The defense methods must be in constant work against adversarial
activities. The work in [97] proposed to reduce the impact of adversar-
ial impact by generating synthetic attacks that can target networks with
SDN architecture and using them to train a detection model to capture
different attack variations. They proposed a Generative Adversarial
Deep Neural Network (GAN) to automate the generation of realistic
data in a semi-supervised manner. GAN applies a set of non-linear trans-
formations on an original malicious sample to generate an adversarial
example that evades classification models. GAN helped the adversarial
 5. SDN-based proactive defense
 5.1. Moving target defense (MTD)
MTD consists of mechanisms that automatically implement diverse
and dynamic network configurations to make the system attack surface
unpredictable to adversaries. As a result, the system status with the
MTD strategy is hard to exploit and more resilient to different forms of
attacks [99,100].
MTD mechanisms are not new as they have been used in conven-
tional networks. However, in these traditional architectures, the im-
plementation of MTD requires the reconfiguration and synchronization
of network devices, interrupting the current communication sessions,
evidencing low efficiency and high cost. Using SDN architecture that
offers a highly flexible and dynamic programmable network, we can
deploy specialized network applications and services to create robust
MTD systems.
The adaptive modification ofIP addresses and ports of hostscan pre-
vent recognizing-based attacks like man-in-the-middle and port scan-
ning attacks [101]. We canrandomly replace the sourceanddestination
IP address of packets with virtual IP addresses in the SDN switches,
which enhances the unpredictability of the network behavior [102].
The selection of dynamic routes provides significant advantages to
avoid adversaries eavesdrop on the network links or launch DDoS/DoS
 5.2. Network function virtualization (NFV)
NFV is a network architecture paradigm that virtualizes different
network node functions, making these network functions (NFs) and
services much more adaptive and scalable. NFV can significantly re-
duce the hardware cost, greatly improve operation efficiency, and
dramatically shorten the development of the lifecycle of a network
service [106].
Although SDN and NFV are two distinct and independent technolo-
gies, combining them in a network can bring multiple advantages to
emerging technologies. SDN provides centralized knowledge about the
network status and programmability, whereas NFV boosts the develop-
ment of virtualized network appliances executed on top of commodity
servers [107].
Next, we review new strategies to defend networks using SDN and
NFV. Work in [108] presents a proactive defense against complex
DDoS attacks. This approach uses virtual networks (VN) to dynamically
reallocate the network resources without disrupting the network service
or violating the VN properties. The components of this solution are
(1) the correct-by-construction VN migration planning and (2) the VN
migration mechanism. The former implements and solves a constraint
satisfaction problem using Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT). The
second component controls the execution of the VN migration strat-
egy on a virtualized physical network. This component handles all
movement logistics, including the precise sequencing/scheduling of the
steps’ realization to complete the move and the timing of such process.
The solution was tested against a crossfire attack. It showed high
effectiveness in restoring the downgraded bandwidth because of the
DDoS attack through the timely migration to a safety threat placement.
Work in [109] proposes a defense system for IoT networks based on
SDN and NFV. A reinforcement learning agent is used to evaluate the
risks of potential attacks and take optimal actions to mitigate them.
SHIELD [110] was a project funded by the European Union to
develop a security framework that offers Security-as-a-Service (SaS).
SHIELD applied NFV/SDN for virtualization and dynamic placement of
virtualized security functions in the network. In combination with Big
NFV promises several advantages to defend the networks proac-
tively. However, it can demand high computation and storage re-
sources. In addition, NFV has been presented before, jointly with
other mechanisms, to provide self-configuration and self-optimization
capabilities. That is, in combination with other strategies studied in
 5.3. Cyber deception
Another type of proactive defense mechanism is cyber deception.
Deception tools distribute a collection of traps and decoys across a
system architecture to imitate genuine assets. Unlike MTD, deception
methods introduce uncertainty for the attacker without changing the
actual surface but instead creating a virtual attack surface [118]. They
provide adversaries with an incorrect view of the target system so
that attacks based on such wrong information are likely to fail and
present an opportunity for detection [118,119]. Examples of deception
tools are simple honeypot systems. Modern deception tools require
analytics and automation methods to make them simple to deploy
but effective for thwarting attacks. The capabilities of SDN provide
an opportunity to design an optimized and autonomous solution for
network defense, which can permit advanced use cases of the decep-
tion platform such as integrated, proactive threat hunting, and active
attacker engagement [120].
Works in [121,122] proposed reconnaissance deception systems
(RCSs) to defend from malicious discovery and reconnaissance attacks
in computer networks. These systems use SDN to simulate complete
virtual network topology, thus achieving an effective defense strategy
against adversarial reconnaissance. Work in [123] proposes an SDN-
based framework for unobtrusively integrating decoy services into
production workloads. The SDN technology divides a production net-
work into segments of production and decoy. Attackers are redirected
to decoys, which have the same configuration as the protected pro-
duction system. Therefore, the attackers never reach the protected
assets.
MimePot [124] is a cyber–physical honeypot conceived for indus-
trial control networks. This security framework can simulate physical
processes operations of Industrial Control Systems to capture intricate
cyber–physical attacks using SDN technology. Work in [118] proposes
a cyber deception system to combat cyber adversaries in a wireless vir-
tualization framework. In this wireless framework, the SDN controller
continuously monitors the network traffic, observes the connections,
and creates mobile virtual network operators (MVNO). Additionally,
it directs cyber adversaries towards deception MVNO. Work in [125]
proposes a security framework with adaptive defense. This solution
protects key nodes based on game theory (GT) through the formulation
of a multistage game by using the architectural advantages of SDN.
Moreover, it considers deceptive behaviors of the cyber defender in
different stages.
Work in [126] presents a cyber deception solution that implements
defenses against penetration attacks using a decoy chain development
(DCD) method based on the combination of NFV and SDN. In this
defense architecture, the SDN controller monitors the security status
of the whole network and can detect possible attack sources using
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) technology. Moreover, using SDN
technology, the DCD can deploy decoy chains in the generic servers
on the DP to change the attack surface, based on the global network
status and under resource constraints and multiple attack sources. NFV
helps to deploy dynamic service delivery in the network.
The goal of the security framework KAGE [127] goes beyond the
implementation of sophisticated honeypots or MTD mechanisms to dy-
namically defend the system. KAGE expanded into a new area of active
defensive deception, where the adversary’s decision loop is deliberately
manipulated by proactive and reactive adaptation of the environment
as KAGE learns about the capabilities and intents of the client that
KAGE is engaging. That is, a detected intrusion does not result in block-
ing or shutting down connections. Instead, KAGE seamlessly moves the
 5.4. Network slicing (NS)
 5.5. Blockchain-assisted SDN
In recent years, Blockchain technology has been explored to design
more scalable, efficient, decentralized, secure, and trustworthy SDN
architectures [131–135]. Blockchain enables verification information
transactions via distributed network authorization and, subsequently,
it adds that data to an unalterable ledger. That is, unknown entities
can communicate with each other without a trusted third party (con-
troller). The decentralization eliminates control by a single controller,
removing the risk of single-point failures. In addition, since each infor-
mation transaction is public, this technology offers a reliable and easily
verifiable infrastructure [136–138].
Given the decentralization property and continuous nodes/users/
information-transaction verification, blockchain can help to preventthe
most common and disruptive attacks in SDN-based networks, namely,
DDoS attacks. The primary use of this technology is to solve the
consensus and synchronization problem of multiple distributed SDN
controllers [132,139] and enable trustworthy controller/switch associ-
ations [140,141]. Nevertheless, we consider blockchain as a proactive
mechanism since it ensures the executed transactions in the network
must be approved and verified by all participating nodes, which cre-
ates irrefutable records to avoid data tampering and double-spending
problems and ensure ledger consistency [139,142]. For instance, the
blockchain technology integration into SDN provides capabilities to
 6. Analysis and comparison
 6.1. Complexity and level of automation
Table 4 ranks proactive and reactive SDN-based security solutions,
which summarizes the findings of the complexity and level of automa-
tion of the classes analyzed previously.
As described before, the complexity analysis includes the computa-
tional and storage resources and the expertise required to implement a
technique. We analyze the automation level in function of the self-* ca-
pabilities that each strategy enables. In the case of self-adaptation, the
analysis considered two factors: the adaptability to mitigate or prevent
zero-day attacks and the ability to defeat AI-enabled adversaries.
In the case of complexity and adaptability capabilities, we provide
a Null, Low, Medium, High, and Advanced ranking to assess how the
SDN-based security solutions stack up against one another. Regarding
self-healing, self-configuration, and self-optimization properties, we
assign Yes (Y) or No (N) checks, which indicate whether a technique en-
ables the corresponding feature. Furthermore, we include the progress
of the strategies, which shows their development status.
In general, we identify that solutions with a high level of automa-
tion demand more complex designs, which implies more computation
and storage capability requirements. Also, we note that the reactive
solutions have been more explored than the proactive solutions, which
still lacks the study of an optimal trade off between performance
and accuracy on defending SDN-based networks. The adaptability of
proactive solutions against zero-day attacks, adversarial environments,
and AI-enabled attacks is advanced since these methods constantly
evolve to minimize/eliminate attack surfaces. However, the elevated
demand for computational resources is a common problem of proactive
solutions. This condition may further limit the scalability of these
solutions. Nevertheless, most of these techniques are emerging, and
their explorations in the coming years will potentially solve these
issues.
Finally, we recognized that NFV technology and AI are crucial
to enable the self-configuration and self-optimization properties of
almost all reactive and proactive security solutions. Techniques of
RL, adversarial learning, MTD, cyber deception, and network slicing
 6.2. Application areas
Table 5 shows the typical application of each security solution.
Although we can implement all the studied defense solutions through
all types of SDN-enabled networks, their complexity of implementation
and unique advantages have made them focus on specific application
areas and network threats.
Reactive solutions become proper for next-generation SDN-based
firewalls [146] commonly used to protect data centers, campus net-
works, internet service providers (ISPs) infrastructure, and industrial
control systems (ICSs) [147]. Most reactive defense proposals center
on DDoS attacks, which are the most frequent and dangerous net-
work threats. Nevertheless, each technique can solve different levels
of sophistication of these attacks. Statistical methods can solve simple
DoS/DDoS and port scanning attacks. More complex DDoS threats
require the use of ML and DL methods. ML techniques render high
performance for network layer (high-volume) DDoS threats. DL ap-
proaches demonstrate better results for application-layer attacks such
as low-rate, slow-rate, and one-hit DDoS attacks. Online adaptation, RL,
and adversarial learning techniques can defeat even more sophisticated
APTs, including AI-enabled threats.
 7. Discussion
 7.1. Scalable SDN-based security solutions
Most of the SDN-based security solutions revised throughout this
survey propose to perform main processes in the AP. The controller
is in charge of capturing data from DP through an SBI protocol and
deploying the mitigation strategies on the physical devices. In this
way, the intelligent approach leverages the computational and storage
resources of the SDN controller, as well as its global visibility and
centralized control.
However, this approach can limit the scalability of the different
security solutions and even introduce new vulnerabilities to DoS/DDoS
attacks. That is, as the traffic demand of modern networks increases,
analyzing all of these packets with a security system at wire speeds
will be challenging using sophisticated algorithms, ensuring at the same
time high accuracy.
Effective SDN-based security solutions require considering the op-
timization of different resources to provide scalability. Fig. 6 shows
specific strategies to add scalability to SDN-based security solutions,
which we discuss in the following.
7.1.1. Traffic sampling
Sampling techniques reduce the flow of data gathering from the
controller and minimize the communication required between switches
and the controller, thus easing the CP overload in the vast network
traffic condition. The sampling period is critical in sampling strate-
gies. The samples’ requests must be periodic in short time intervals
since long intervals are impractical for accurate and rapid detection
of anomalies. The attack events appearing over a time scale inferior to
the one selected for traffic sampling will make the security control rule
useless.
Improvements to the sampling strategy include adaptive flow collec-
tion [149]. The improper implementation of sampling methods com-
promises the accuracy of threats detection, given the relevant flows
missing probability.
7.1.2. Stateful SDN
We can solve the scalability of the Open SDN architecture by keep-
ing data flows in the DP as much as possible to maintain the controller’s
safety and reduce the burden of the controller and SBI bandwidth.
In a stateful SDN architecture, the switches make independent for-
warding decisions based on their local flow state information without
contacting the controller [150]. The facts that supported the develop-
ment of the stateful SDN architecture include:
Stateful architecture can helpto effectively reduce the impact onthe
network performance during DoS/DDoS attacks [151–156]. Further,
the P4 technology [157] and VPP-based VNFs will enable intelligence
in switches, to obtain an open-access, automated and scalable security
solution.
7.1.3. Cooperative control and data plane
It is important to note that sophisticated attacks, such as slow DDoS
attacks, might be troublesome to detect using local switches’ informa-
tion, meaning that stateful SDN architecture could not be efficient. A
cooperative intelligence between DP and CP could potentially minimize
the effects of advanced DoS/DDoS attacks on network performance [89,
158,159]. In this approach, the stateful switches commonly perform
coarse-grained detection to determine suspicious flows and send them
to the controller. The controller leverages its computation capabilities
to perform fine-grained classification of attacks and propose defense
strategies. Finally, the switches react to mitigate the attacks, according
to rules installed by the controller.
It is essential to design the cooperation mechanisms between the DP
and CP carefully and effectively. Switches with some additional/special
modules or a new component like DP cache, will increase the network
complexity and the overall cost [34]. Moreover, it will be unrealistic to
run complex detection algorithms, such as ML, DL, MTD, etc., within
the switches. Usually, the SDN controller runs these algorithms. Nev-
ertheless, switches could only perform coarse-grained attack detection
and take independent actions if required.
 7.2. Evaluation of SDN-based solutions
It is tough to find many studies with an evaluation that is both
comprehensive and realistic. Various works give many results on a wide
range of performance metrics, using small test networks, lacking the
realism of implementation. Other works try to build a large topology
using simulation tools but run into some issues due to the limitations of
the environment. Without a strong evaluation, one cannot fully assess
the benefit and overhead associated with a new system, so the practical
applicability of a given solution usually remains in question [39].
The evaluation of critical parameters such as the traffic added by the
method, the processing and memory demands, the changes require-
ments in the current architecture of SDN, or the level of automation
of the proposed method, can help to define if the technique provides
crucial benefits when deployed in a production network.
The most common metrics used to validate SDN-based security
solutions for networks, particularly those based on the threat detec-
tion/mitigation approach, are accuracy, recall, F-score, FPs rate, ROC
curve, and detection rate. Since these metrics are related to the clas-
sifier performance used on the threat detection, they only allow a
partial assessment of the overall conditions existing in the network.
Besides using the classification metrics, we can evaluate the SDN-based
security solutions using other performance metrics, as described in the
following.
Table 6 defines a set of parameters and metrics to evaluate the
network security design using SDN effectively.
Firstly, reactive solutions are mainly evaluated based on the perfor-
mance of threats detection and mitigation. In addition to the standard
classification metrics, we can quantify the preprocessing effectiveness,
the models’ training time, the robustness on attack detection, the ratio
of malicious traffic blocked, and the legitimate packet loss rate.
The flexibility parameter is also significant since integral security
solutions will provide a more complete and holistic system to defend
the network.
Moreover, all security proposal designs must consider the scalability
component. A sophisticated security system could not be scalable,
whereas a simple one could be ineffective for advanced attacks. The
mechanism of security must have a trade off between effectiveness and
scalability. Direct metrics to assess the scalability property of a security
solution include the end-to-end communication delay, the controller
CPU and memory usage, the switches TCAM usage, the throughput, and
the additional traffic on the network. The analysis of the algorithms’
complexity (preprocessing, detection, and mitigation algorithms) using
big O notation can be helpful in the proper definition of the scalability
factor of a specific solution.
The effectiveness and scalability of a security solution must not
affect the quality of experience (QoE) provided to legitimate users. The
QoE can be measured using the QoS of legitimate users, using surveys
with automatic tools.
A crucial evaluation parameter is the degree of automation of the se-
curity solution, which measures the system’s human independence. We
can evaluate the ability of a solution to enable specific self-* properties.
Maintaining the right balance of machine-powered security automa-
tion and human intervention will empower security professionals to
effectively and efficiently carry out incident responses.
A fundamental evaluation parameter is the implementation and
deployment complexity of a security solution. Too complex solutions
will result in time-consuming solution deployment and locked to highly
skilled developers.
Finally, the cost is a fundamental parameter that could limit the
implementation of revolutionary ideas. All solution approaches need
 7.3. Open problems
 8. Challenges and future directions to network security automa-
tion
 8.1. P4 enabling automation
We stated that one strategy to scale the automated security solution
is to add intelligence to forwarding devices. Conventional switches
and OF-based switches will require additional appliances to enable
 8.2. Orchestration for a comprehensive security solution
The SDN-based security solutions presented in this survey try to
solve a single security threat without manual intervention. However,
multiple threats could occur at the same time. Therefore, implementing
isolated security solutions to automate network defense could result in
redundant functions in many of their subsystems (such as collecting
information), the execution of inconsistent tasks, or conflicts with
other non-security-related network applications. The SDN controller
can execute the automated security solutions in a purposeful order
and verify the success of each task. Besides, integrating all network
security solutions in a unique framework, one can achieve autonomy
and resilience in the overall network operation. This structure is known
as orchestration, which can solve rule conflicts generated by different
security applications, also merge and simplify similar tasks. In short, an
SDN-based security orchestrator can enable an automated, robust, and
holistic defense solution with optimized resources utilization.
One example of implementing SDN-based orchestration is to use
the modern architecture named Service Function Chaining (SFC) [170],
which is the mostpromising way to process the packets in pre-described
order of VNFs. SFC provides a specific network service to the user and
 9. Conclusion
 Declaration of competing interest


Text:
----------------------
1. Introduction
Security demands in new complex and dynamic networks, such as
IoT [1–4], cloud computing [5], 5G/6G communication networks[6,7],
and vehicular communications, [8,9], in addition to the increasing
number of sophisticated and intelligent attacks, are key motivating
factors for deploying automated defense solutions for networks using
the Software-Defined Networking (SDN) technology. On the one hand,
key networking trends place an increasing burden on systems and
network administrators. These trends include an increase in network
traffic volume, the virtualization of servers, storage, and networking
devices, the growth in size and complexity of data centers, and the
growth of cloud computing and IoT applications. In this context, the
Information Technology (IT) workforce becomes a significant security
bottleneck. This workforce cannot manage the vastly increasing num-
ber of incidents and alerts and the need to deploy optimized security
controls in response. Manual procedures result in slower detection
and remediation of issues, mistakes in resource configuration, and
erratic security policy implementation, leaving systems vulnerable to
compliance issues and threats.
On top of that, advanced security skills are in higher demand
than ever before; however, there is a significant lack of qualified and
skilled security professionals. An estimated 3.5 million cybersecurity
jobs will be available but unfilled by 2021 [10]. In addition, existing
cybersecurity staff is overworked and not set up for 24x7x365 incom-
ing threats [11]. According to the CISCO Cybersecurity Report Series
2020 [12], from a survey of 2800 organizations around 13 countries,
40% of these were receiving 5000 daily alerts. This overwhelming
number of alerts is having an impact onsecurity administrators’ fatigue.
As a result, according to a report presented by the Enterprise Strategy
Group [13], IT teams ignore about 74% of security threat alerts, even
when they have security solutions in place, due to the sheer volume.
On the other hand, agile and sophisticated threats are rising, such as
the Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) [14]. Different from common
cyber-attacks, APTs focus on large organizations and industry sectors,
causing severe damage, such as failure of essential services and destruc-
tion of critical infrastructure. These attacks usually become undetected,
and the damage caused can be critical [15]. Among the most frequent,
sophisticated, and dangerous APTs are DDoS attacks. According to a
Kaspersky report [16], the number of DDoS attacks in 2020 almost
doubled the number of DDoS attacks of 2019. APTs can cause huge
capital and reputational losses to the victims. Indeed, the World Eco-
nomic Forum detected that cyberattacks are perceived as the #2 global
risk of concern to business leaders in advanced economies [17].
Including automation in the heart of network security management
will help to deal with the increasing number of alerts and skilled IT
administrators’ shortages. Security automation is the machine-based
execution of security actions to programmatically detect, investigate,
mitigate, and prevent threats timely and efficiently with minimal hu-
man intervention. With this automation, repetitive and time-consuming
activities are taken out of the hands of the IT workforce so they can
focus on more relevant value-adding work.
Security automation can reduce the average cost of a breach by
95% [18]. Therefore, most organizations plan to increase automation
to simplify and speed up response times in their security ecosystems.
According to Gartner, security automation is one of the top security
and risk management trends [19]. The execution of automated security
tasks is much faster than human interactions and generates fewer
errors.
SDN is enabling security managers to bridge the response resource
gap through intelligent incident detection and automated response.
SDN decouples the control plane from the network devices and logically
centralizes the administration of network resources. This networking
technology presents new security challenges for network designers and
operators, but it also provides a platform for implementing reliable,
centrally managed, and automated security solutions for networks.
Although many surveys have already studied intelligent meth-
ods applied in SDN-based security solutions, none have comprehen-
sively analyzed and compared the complexity and level of automation
achieved with these techniques. The idea of security automation in
SDN environments is fundamental since this technology was created
to facilitate network operation and management with minimal human
intervention, which is considered error-prone.
Network automation has been studied from different perspectives
and defined using terms such as cognitive, self-managing, or self-aware
networks [20–22]. The common characteristics of these definitions are
the ability to think, learn, and remember. Therefore, an automated
network can adapt in response to conditions or events based on the
reasoning and prior knowledge it has obtained. Moreover, an auto-
mated network can be characterized by its ability to complete its
tasks autonomously by using its self-properties, namely, self-healing,
self-adaptation, self-configuration, and self-optimization, to adapt dy-
namically to changing requirements while considering the end-to-end
goals [22].
In this paper, we survey existing research efforts related to the
automation of security in SDN-based networks, using peer-reviewed
studies published in the last seven years (2015–2021).
The security solutions reviewed are divided into two main classes,
namely reactive and proactive solutions. On one hand, reactive security
solutions (also known as detection/mitigation solutions) are based on
different Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled techniques such as Ma-
chine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), and Reinforcement Learning
(RL) with online or offline model learning. The methods of AI have
been used to discover threats in networks [23–25] since they are
considered as robust potential solutions to make networks self-aware,
self-adaptive, self-secured, self-healing, and self-managed [26,27]. The
study of SDN-based reactive security solutions requires an analysis of
the characteristics that makes detection and mitigation mechanisms
adaptive to changes in the network. On the other hand, proactive
security solutions use emerging concepts such as Network Function Vir-
tualization, Moving Target Defense, Cyber Deception, Network Slicing,
and Blockchain to secure the SDN architecture effectively. Proactive
defense methods focus on evade/prevent attacks or on reducing the
attack surfaces in the network. We evaluate the level of automa-
tion, of reactive and proactive solutions, in terms of their complexity
level with respect to their implementation, and their self-* properties
(self-healing, self-adaptation, self-configuration, and self-optimization).
The contributions of this work are:
This work represents the first attempt to study SDN-based security
solutions from an automation perspective.
1.1. Existing surveys
The problem of securing SDN networks has attracted a lot of atten-
tion. Many comprehensive reviews have been produced recently. These
reviews divided security and SDN into two categories: security for SDN,
and SDN as a security solution for networks. In the first category,
security issues specific to the SDN architecture and their solutions have
been surveyed [28–31]. The most common security issues targeting the
SDN elements are the DoS/DDoS attacks. Therefore, many surveys focus
on these attacks and their solutions [32–35].
In the second category, the SDN-based security solutions to protect
traditional networks have been reviewed. The standard strategy to
review thesesolutions has been to divide them into statistics-based, ML-
based, DL-based, and metaheuristics-based solutions [23–25,36–38].
An alternative approach has been threat-oriented reviews [39–41].
These reviews define different types of existing threats to networks
and study SDN-based solutions to these threats. Besides, several surveys
integrate the study of both categories, security for SDN and SDN-based
security solutions [26,42,43].
Recent work in [20] reviews self-aware computer networks that in-
clude those that propose the use of SDNs as a means to implement these
concepts. It analyzes the benefits of ML and RL mechanisms to implant
self-awareness into networks. Additionally, this study integrates the
QoS, energy, and security in a system. This system uses an RL-based
decision engine to achieve a self-aware network. However, this study
does not focus on SDN-based defense and does not analyze the level of
automation and complexity of the self-aware mechanisms.
In contrast to previous surveys, we study SDN-based security solu-
tions for networks from an automationpoint of view. With thispurpose,
we propose a new taxonomy of security solutions according to different
levels of automation and complexity. The level of automation of these
techniques is evaluated and compared interms of their self-* properties.
No previous survey has studied the automation capabilities of SDN-
based security solutions. We also introduce a discussion about the
scalability and assessment factors of the SDN-based security systems,
which are fundamental in the design of complete, trustworthy, and
ready to deploy automated solutions. Finally, we present the prob-
lems and challenges of current defense solutions and future research
directions in the area of security automation in SDN environments.
1.2. Survey organization
This survey is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the back-
ground knowledge of the SDN architecture and the current state of
the SDN technology. Section 3 introduces the taxonomy of the methods
searching for network defense automation using the SDN technology.
Section 4 reviews the reactive security solutions for networks using
SDN and intelligent techniques. Section 5 reviews the state-of-the-
art proactive security solutions. Section 6 summarizes the findings
of the level of automation and complexity of reactive and proactive
solutions. Discussion and challenges are presented in Sections 7 and 8,
respectively. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 9. Table 1
shows the list of the acronyms used in this survey.
2. An overview of SDN
SDN is a new networking paradigm where forwarding hardware
is decoupled from control decisions. SDN provides new networking
capabilities: dynamic network programming, centralized network mon-
itoring, network virtualization, among others.
Fig. 1 shows the general architecture of SDN. It has three planes: the
data plane (DP), the control plane (CP), and the application plane (AP).
The DP contains forwarding devices that forward, drop, and modify
packets based on policies received from the CP. The CP programs the
network resources, updates forwarding rules dynamically, and makes
network administration flexible and agile. The AP contains applications
which according to the business requirements, can implement the con-
trol logic to change the network behavior. Examples of applications are
Network Virtualization, Security in Networks, Mobility Management,
and Network Monitoring.
Three interfaces are present in the SDN architecture. The south-
bound interface (SBI), defined between the DP and the CP, permits
monitoring and notifies network events from the DP to the CP. Also,
SBI enables to forward control policies from the CP to the DP to provide
functions, such as programmatic control of devices. OpenFlow (OF) is
the first and most popular protocol for SBI [44]. NetConf and SNMP
are other commonly used SBI APIs. The Northbound Interface (NBI),
defined between the CP and the AP, is used by the applications to ex-
ploit the abstracted network provided by the CP to express the network
behavior. Rest, Java, and Python are examples of NBI APIs. Finally,
the Eastbound/Westbound Interface (EWBI) allows communication in
multi-controller environments. The EWBI also enables the connection
of the SDN controller to other network architectures.
2.1. State of development of SDN technology
The original and ideal characteristics of the SDN paradigm are: con-
trol plane separation, simplified forwarding device, centralized control,
network automation and virtualization, and openness [45]. The net-
working paradigm with all these characteristics, hereafter, isreferred to
as Open SDN [45]. Open SDN was expected to bring significant benefits
to networking, such as logically programmable infrastructure, central-
ized administration, dynamic and fast optimization of network opera-
tion and services, networking automation, and low-cost deployments.
OF-based SDN is an example of Open SDN.
The OF-based SDN has several limitations [38,43,45–47]. The main
limitations of this technology are that OF excessively decouples and
centralizes the control of the network and allows complete visibility.
These factors imply that all network traffic needs to be relayed to
a central controller. To implement novel solutions, such as traffic
management in high-performance networks, one has a difficult task
since it results unfeasible due to the bottleneck created in the controller
and the switches. In addition, the controller is vulnerable to hard-
ware and software failures. Without the controller, the whole network
lacks functionality. Solutions to these problems have been extensively
studied as established in different surveys [28–35].
Alternatively, the SDN movement has led to the origin of SDN-like
architectures to solve real and urgent networking problems and ren-
der new and innovative network services in production environments.
These network overlay technologies were designed to create new com-
petitive environments shifting the focus from physical infrastructure
to software features. They can provide great agility and automation,
simplified operational requirements, and extensive configuration func-
tion. These solutions can be seen as alternatives to Open SDN, which
address real-life problems. Table 2 shows these alternatives to SDN-like
solutions [45].
It is important to recognize that these alternative SDN-like solutions
do not face all the issues and implementation challenges of the Open
SDN. However, they present partial advantages of the original idea of
the SDN paradigm. For instance, openness is not a characteristic of the
examples of SDN via hypervisor presented in Table 2. In this survey,
we include both Open SDN and SDN-like based security solutions.
Current trends in SDN include leveraging new technologies such
as P4 to increase network programmability and openness. P4, which
stands for Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors, pro-
vides high visibility and control of events in the data plane. This
technology releases network devices from closed protocols and runtime
APIs (such as OF). Moreover, P4 increases the action field of the
devices in the data plane, which reduces the SDN-controller processing
overhead. Thus, this technology boosts the overall SDN-based network
performance, enables deep network programmability, and amplifies the
spectrum of possible network applications [48].
3. Defense automation in SDN-based networks
Network security automation is a prominent area of study and
is expected to be solved by modern network architectures, such as
SDN. We noticed different methods presented in the literature that
pursue the automation of defending networks using SDN and intelli-
gent techniques. To review such techniques, we divided the security
solutions into two main classes: reactive and proactive. Fig. 2 shows
the proposed classification analyzed in the following sections. Reactive
or detection-based security solutions use different techniques, includ-
ing Statistics, Machine Learning, Deep Learning, and Reinforcement
Learning to detect and mitigate attacks. Proactive solutions prevent
attacks by leveraging techniques such as Moving Target Defense, Net-
work Function Virtualization, Cyber Deception, Network Slicing, and
Blockchain technology.
Each subclass of defense strategy requires a different level of com-
plexity (computation, storage, and implementation), also in order to
achieve different levels of automation (Fig. 2). The level of automation
of the classes can be assessed as a function of their self-* capabili-
ties [22]:
These parameters are analyzed and compared in the following
sections.
4. SDN-based reactive defense
4.1. Threat detection based on statistics
The SDN paradigm has high computation capabilities in the con-
troller, which allows the implementation of advanced and effective
methods to detect attacks. Specific attacks, such as DDoS, have been
intensely studied, and their typical behavior can be used to detect them
quickly. For instance, in an exploitation DDoS attack [49], many widely
distributed zombies can attack a host, a segment of the network, or
a service, by flooding the target with packets to exhaust the victims’
bandwidth or resources. Such a DDoS attack can be detected by regis-
tering thenumber of packetsdirected to anIP destination and analyzing
this information.
Two methods widely used to characterize flows in networks and
analyze suspicious behaviors are entropy and wavelet transform. The
entropy is a measure of uncertainty of a variable that allows measuring
the information gain. The acquisition of information corresponds to the
reduction in entropy. Entropy has been extensively used for anomaly
detection since it enables the detection of changes in traffic distribution
of several attacks [50–52]. For instance, during a DDoS attack on a
specific service, there is a significant decrease in the destination IP and
port entropy [53]. During a Port Scan attack, the attacker sends probe
packets to a wide range of ports in a specific host to find available ser-
vices. In this case, a significant decrease in the source port entropy can
reveal the attacker if it does not use random source ports [54]. These
anomalies can be identified using predefined thresholds on changes in
the entropy values.
The accuracy of the entropy-based approaches can decrease drasti-
cally at lower attack rates because the entropy difference in low-volume
attacks is almost non-detectable. These threats are frequent in IoT-
based port scanning and DDoS attacks. Given that the thresholds are
defined as fixed parameters during normal traffic conditions, this lack
of adaptability can reduce the efficiency of these methods. Finally, a
fundamental parameter to fit is the window size used to calculate the
entropy, which must trade off processing usage and detection accuracy.
It is better to have adaptive window size and threshold.
Wavelet transform is another tool to detect attacks in networks,
particularly in flooding attacks [55]. Wavelet transform is helpful in
data feature extraction or characterization. It transforms data from time
to scale domain. This method allows to obtain two kinds of coefficients,
one is the low-frequency coefficient, and the other is thehigh-frequency
coefficient. These coefficients can help to detect attacks, using defined
thresholds to identify the presence of anomalies [56].
Statistic-based detection approaches are well explored and have a
relatively low calculation overload and storage demand. These methods
are real-time capable and can handle a large amount of traffic data.
Detection methods based on statistics cannot help to achieve the
self-configuration and self-optimization properties. Although statistical
methods achieve self-healing for known attacks, they do not achieve
self-adaptation. These techniques operate under human supervision and
often fail to detect sophisticated zero-day, polymorphic, and AI-enabled
attacks. That fact has driven the security mechanisms to evolve to the
more robust threat detection methods based on models using different
intelligent techniques, presented in the following.
4.2. Model-based attack detection with offline adaptation
Model-based methods learn the behavior of a network using histor-
ical data, including attacks and non-attack events. These models are
trained once and then used to detect attacks. That is, these methods
learn the system’s behavior offline. Fig. 3 shows the workflow of the
offline learning attack detection approach.
Offline learning is necessary given the high dynamics of networks.
On unexpected and extreme network changes, the models being in use
to detect attacks will require updating through offline retraining to
adapt to the new network’s behavior.
Offline learning methods include ML-based and DL-based attack
detection methods.
4.2.1. ML-based attack detection
Many proposals have demonstrated that SDN architecture is suitable
to deploy ML algorithms given the higher computational resources in
the CP and the global visibility of the network in real-time. Many
surveys revealed that almost all ML techniques were explored jointly
with SDN technology to detect complex network attacks [24–26,36–38,
40,42]. Therefore, we decided not to do redundant work by reviewing
all those works. Instead, we analyze how recent ML methods support
detecting attacks in SDN networks.
Fig. 4 shows the most used ML methods to implement SDN-security
solutions: Support Vector Machine (SVM) [57–59], ?-Nearest Neighbors
(KNN) [60,61], Random Forest (RF) [56], Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) [62], Fuzzy Logic [63], and Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [64,
65]. Most of ML-based security solutions focus on Network/Transport
Layer (L3/L4) DDoS attacks, which are high-volume attacks and easier
to detect. Application Layer DDoS attacks that are harder to detect are
also solved using ML methods.
Other less common model-based mechanisms based on intelligent
strategies use feature-pattern graph model [66], Holt Winter for Digital
Signature System (HWDS) [67], catastrophe theory [68], and time-
series data mining (e.g., ARIMA) [69]. The methods achieve accuracy
above 90% on DDoS attack detection.
Even though most ML methods provide high accuracy in detecting
threats (Fig. 4), they still lack a fundamental factor that could limit
their implementation in production networks, namely the scalabil-
ity. Most of the ML-based solutions have been tested using security
datasets or small test networks. Therefore, the complexity of these
techniques is not optimized. This shortage could bring critical problems
when implementing these systems in production environments, such as
unacceptable delays.
4.2.2. DL-based attack detection
DL algorithms are capable of automatically finding correlations in
a high volume of data. For that reason, DL-based techniques have
been used in the last years to detect complex attacks on networks.
Several surveys have studied the application of DL for attack detection
in SDNs [36–38]. Therefore, we decided not to do redundant work by
reviewingall those works. Instead, we explore the most recent DL-based
attack detection proposals.
Fig. 4 shows the application of DL methods to attack detection.
The most common DL methods explored are Deep Belief Propagation
(DBP) [70], Stacked Auto Encoder (SAE) [71,72], Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [73], Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) neural network
[74], Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network [75,76], and
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) neural network [77,78]. These methods
demonstrate high accuracy in detecting L3/L4 DDoS attacks. Most in-
terestingly, DL helps to detect complex APTs, namely, application-layer
DDoS attacks, with high accuracy.
It is noticeable that DL allows higher accuracy than ML in detecting
attacks (Fig. 4). However, DL requires more computation and storage
capabilities, which may limit the scalability of the proposed methods.
Nevertheless, given the latest CPU and GPU capabilities customized for
DL, this could not represent a relevant problem.
ML techniques have been extensively studied to detect attacks. DL
techniques are newer than ML and continue to be explored as promising
solutions to achieve high accuracy in detecting sophisticated threats.
Offline learning methods focus on two main goals: (1) to minimize
the complexity of the security solution and (2) to maximize its detec-
tion performance. The complexity can be reduced by optimizing the
algorithm/model or by minimizing the number of input variables. High
detection performance, measured in general by accuracy and false pos-
itive (FP) rates, can be achieved with more complex algorithms/models
and using a high number of input variables. Therefore, these techniques
need a trade off between accuracy and complexity. DL methods have
higher demands of these resources than ML methods.
As the training is an offline process that can be performed on
the idle time of the controller or on an alternative server, the time
overhead of this process can be ignored. However, several researchers
have proposeddata preprocessing methodologies, whose overhead is an
important factor. Also, the periods toupdate (offline) the models should
be defined appropriately, according to the attack detection accuracy
desired and the computational resources available.
Although these offline learning-based techniques are robust to de-
tect complex and zero-day attacks, they may not adapt timely to drastic
changes in the network. Furthermore, these methods can be easily de-
feated by intelligent attackers. These methods demand periodic human
supervision to update/correct them. It is important to recognize that
offline learning strategies with appropriate update periods could reach
enough adaptability to follow timely network dynamics. Nonetheless,
the emerging techniques of adaptive ML [79] will potentially be a
key enabler of autonomous threat detection capable of operating in
ever-changing contexts.
Finally, model-based attack detectionwith offline adaptation cannot
help to achieve the self-configuration and self-optimization properties.
4.3. Model-based attack detection with online adaptation
As networks are constantly evolving, detection models with online
adaptation can be appropriate strategies to timely follow the network
dynamics, thus increasing the detection rate, minimizing the FP rate,
and reducing the detection time.
To better understand the necessity of the detection model adap-
tation, we present the concept drift in the following. Consider ?, the
input features, and ?, the output variables of a system to be modeled.
According to the Bayesian decision theory, a classification can be
described with the equation,
where, ?(?) = ??
In dynamically changing and non-stationary environments, the sys-
tem behavior can change over time. The changes in the system may
affect the probability distribution of the input data ?(?), the prior prob-
abilities of the classes ?(?), the class conditional probabilities ?(?|?),
and as a result, the posterior probabilities of classes ?(?|?), affecting
the prediction [80]. These variations over time of the distribution
probabilities are known as the phenomenon of concept drift.
Computer networks are dynamic and non-stationary environments
where the concept drift is present. Therefore, threat detection models
need to have mechanisms to adapt to evolving data over time. Other-
wise, their performance will degrade. These models must be updated
with the new data distribution or be replaced to meet the changed
situation.
Online learning strategies can be adequate to deal with the concept
drift since they process data sequentially. These strategies can produce
a model with a partial training dataset, and the model is continu-
ously updated during the operation as more information arrives. Fig. 5
shows the general structure of online adaptive learning that can effec-
tively prevent the concept drift, according to [80]. The online learning
procedure has the following steps:
In this structure, a Memory module defines how and which data is
presented to the Learning module. The Loss Estimation module tracksthe
performance of the learning algorithm. It also sends information to the
Change Detection module to update the model if required. For details of
each component in this architecture, please refer to [80].
From the implementation perspective, as model adaptation is on-
line, it is necessary to consider the SDN controller processing ca-
pabilities. Moreover, the initial model can be trained offline, using
historical data, and loaded into the SDN controller. Subsequently, the
mechanisms of online adaptation will update the model using measures
gathered from the network. In general, we assume that online learning
mechanisms are unsupervised since there is no immediate and direct
feedback about the model decisions. Therefore, anomaly detection
mechanisms presented in the literature [81] are in the category of
model-based attack detection with online adaptation, as long as they
update the model according to network variations. In this way, unsu-
pervised and adaptive ML/DL methods are in the category presented in
this section.
For instance, work in [82] presents an online learning algorithm
to detect Heavy Hitters (HH) in SDN networks. HH are entities whose
number of network elements is at least a specific fraction of the total
number of network elements (e.g., flows whose volumes are larger
than certain thresholds). This study detects heavy traffic. A model
receives flows collected from the switches. A market list ? contains
HHs historically identified. The online learning mechanism maps every
incoming flow to a network state (? = 0 for HH and ? = 1 for normal
network activity) according to its bytes and weights changes. The
weights and thresholds in ? are pre-defined by the administrator based
on the characteristics of the flow and a historical dataset. The network
state feedbacks on the market list ?. The OF protocol gathers statistics
from the DP. To reduce the overhead of gathering flow information
of the switches, the controller decides how to change the period of
collecting statistics and sends coarse-grained or fine-grained rules to
the switch as a zoom-out or zoom-in of existing rules. The evaluation
of this proposal, based on detection accuracy, detection time, and
communication overhead, demonstrates its effectiveness.
Although we can find several studies that propose online unsu-
pervised learning attack detection (anomaly detection), the incursion
on developing comprehensive online learning mechanisms to detect
attacks on networks leveraging the SDN technology is limited. A com-
plete online detection method should solve the concept drift, explained
before, using a structure similar to that shown in Fig. 5. The limited
exploration in this due to online learning does not necessarily mean su-
periority to offline learning. In fact, due to the need for real-time model
adaptation of online mechanisms, they can produce high processing
overhead or even high latency. Hence, the importance of developing
light-weighted but effective online learning mechanisms.
Streaming algorithms are another approach to achieve adaptability
in attack detection and operate between online and offline learning
methods. They can process high-speed continuous flows and use limited
processing and memory. Therefore, examples are sequentially pro-
cessed as they arrive in a few steps. Streaming algorithms are less
restrictive than online algorithms since they can handle the input batch
by batch to update the decision model and offer faster adaptation than
offline learning. Streaming algorithms can have random access to pre-
vious examples or representative/selected examples. Thus, streaming
algorithms can effectively detect threats in SDN, offering a high level
of adaptability to network changes and the scalability required since
resources on the controller are limited.
Model-based attack detection techniques with an online adapta-
tion that solves the concept drift require further explorations. These
techniques demand high computational resources. One significant ad-
vantage of online learning is the low requirement of storage capac-
ity because these methods preserve limited batches of samples for
model adaptation. The implementation of these techniques may require
elevated expertise in implementing sophisticated algorithms.
In addition, these techniques learn the network behavior in real-
time. Therefore, they provide the advanced capabilities needed to adapt
against zero-day attacks. These conditions make these techniques to be
less dependent on human supervision. However, AI-enabled attacks can
still represent a big concern for these methods. Finally, online adapta-
tion only on the attack detection cannot enable the self-configuration
and self-optimization properties.
4.4. Reinforcement learning for threat mitigation
Reactive solutions require a mitigation part after an attack has been
detected. Blocking or dropping malicious traffic is the most basic miti-
gation strategy [56,59,63,67,83–85], and it assumes an attack detection
performance of 100%. However, even complex DL-based solutions
cannot achieve such perfection in detecting attacks. Moreover, other
mitigation strategies have been proposed, such as delaying suspicious
traffic [86–88] or redirecting the suspicious traffic to Network Pro-
cessor Units (NPUs) such as deep packet inspection (DPI) modules
for deeper traffic analysis [62,89]. These approaches are intended
to reduce the effect of legitimate traffic affected by false positives.
However, in these solutions, attackers still use part of the network
resources.
A need arose for a defense system that would not only detect an
intrusion on time but also would make the most optimal real-time
crisis-action decision on how the network security policy should be
modified to mitigate the threat. Thus, mitigation solutions based on
Reinforcement Learning (RL) have been proposed.
In the RL paradigm, software agents automatically define the ideal
behavior within a specific context by continually making value judg-
ments to select good actions over bad [90]. In a typical RL model, an
agent monitors the environment via perception. It also takes actions
within the environment, via an actuator, which could change the
state of the environment. At each time step, the agent receives an
observational input reflecting the state ? of the environment. In turn,
it can take an action ? that transfers the state of the network into a
new state ??. This is conveyed to the agent, along with a reinforcement
signal ?, indicating the value and desirability of the action held [91].
Attack mitigation proposals configure certain states, action-sets,
and rewards to implement the RL to automate the attack mitigation
[90,92–94]. Work in [91] proposed a unified general scheme for de-
signing complex and adaptive RL agents for the network threat mitiga-
tion task. This proposal is able to automate the mitigation of complex
attacks, such as APT.
RL-based mitigation strategies still face critical practical obstacles.
Low sample efficiency and reward function specification are possi-
bly the biggest obstacles to applying RL algorithms. Other critical
shortcomings of RL are:
RL promises an active and automated solution to complex threats.
However, further exploration is needed.
RL-based mitigation strategies are adaptive to the environment
and changes in the attacks. However, these methods are emerging,
and crucial practical challenges need to be solved, such as elevated
computation and data storage demands. Moreover, it requires a high
level of expertise to define the states’ models and reward function
shaping. Nevertheless, solving these issues will lead to a big step
towards security automation in networks.
RL-mitigation methods combined with Network Function Virtual-
ization technology could provide the capabilities of self-configuration
and self-optimization to protect networks. However, further efforts are
required to solve several related issues, such as the scalability property.
4.5. Adversarial learning
All defense proposals studied previously unrealistically assume that
the attackers are not aware of the defense mechanisms. However, once
deployed these implementations in production networks, intelligent
and adaptive adversaries may violate the initial assumption of the AI
techniques. The commoditization of ML tools can enable attackers to
perform many experiments to identify how to use them for malicious
purposes. Also, the use of public datasets on security model training
is a problem because attackers could use the information to create a
strategy for poisoning training data, known as adversarial samples.
Most ML methods are sensitive to adversarial samples, e.g., regres-
sion models, SVM, DT, RF, NN, and KNN. In addition, work in [95]
demonstrated that adversarial attacks have a relatively high impact on
different DL-based detections, such as (MLP), CNN, and LSTM, resulting
in a reduction of the detection accuracy and increasing the training
time. Even adaptive techniques, such as RL, can be affected by Adver-
sarial Machine Learning (AML) methods. Authors in [96] demonstrated
two ways of how AML can affect RL-based defense performance: (1) the
AML applies a perturbation to the state observed by the target so that
the agent chooses a different action as the optimal, and (2) the AML
corrupts the reward function, so the direction towards the loss function
minimization is perturbed, which results in delayed optimal policy im-
plementation. The study showed that even these simple attacks might
cause RL agents to take suboptimal actions. The authors suggested that
simple solution ideas such as adding a 5% error to the reward signal in
free attack periods can help the agent learn optimal actions, although
some delay is maintained.
The defense methods must be in constant work against adversarial
activities. The work in [97] proposed to reduce the impact of adversar-
ial impact by generating synthetic attacks that can target networks with
SDN architecture and using them to train a detection model to capture
different attack variations. They proposed a Generative Adversarial
Deep Neural Network (GAN) to automate the generation of realistic
data in a semi-supervised manner. GAN applies a set of non-linear trans-
formations on an original malicious sample to generate an adversarial
example that evades classification models. GAN helped the adversarial
examples generation that can deceive two ML detection models for
SDN, KNN, and RF classification models. The authors evaluated the
decrease in attack detection rate as the effect of adversarial attacks.
Protecting AI-powered security systems and considering malicious
use of AI by attackersare part of the security strategy technology trends
for 2020 [98]. Adversarial learning jointly with SDN technology has
not been widely explored to solve the security problem in networks.
As the attacks are becoming complex, the use of methods capable of
defeating intelligent adversary attacks is becoming critical towards the
automation of network defense.
Methods that countermeasure adversarial AI-enabled attacks require
high computation capacity, medium storage extent, and elevated AI
implementation abilities. These methods can timely adapt to zero-day
attacks and thwart AI-enabled adversaries. That makes these methods
highly independent of human supervision.
These methods can be enhanced using the Network Function Vir-
tualization technology to provide the capabilities of self-configuration
and self-optimization. Nevertheless, these methods have not
been widely explored. Sophisticated and smart attacks are expected to
target networks in the following years. Therefore, it is recommended
to keep exploring adversarial learning techniques that enable the
detection of dynamic threats in adversarial environments.
5. SDN-based proactive defense
Reactive approaches imply obtaining as much telemetry as possible
to detect potential attacks. Even if SDN simplifies and centralizes the
network monitoring and control, the detection/mitigation approach
is costly for the defender since logs management is storage greedy,
and threat detection is expensive in computation. Furthermore, the
attackers will briefly affect the network performance until they are
detected, causing considerable costs. The defender’s role is unfair in
this approach since it attempts to prevent intrusions at every possible
location. Meanwhile, the attacker only needs to discover and exploit a
single vulnerability to breach the complete defense.
In contrast, proactive defense methods allow inverting this asymme-
try between attackers and defenders. These methods implement mech-
anisms to evade/prevent attacks or reduce the attack surfaces in the
network. SDN has beenafundamental element in designingand deploy-
ing proactivedefense for networks, given its centralized monitoring and
control of networks with dynamic programming capability.
Next, existing methods of proactive defenses are analyzed.
5.1. Moving target defense (MTD)
MTD consists of mechanisms that automatically implement diverse
and dynamic network configurations to make the system attack surface
unpredictable to adversaries. As a result, the system status with the
MTD strategy is hard to exploit and more resilient to different forms of
attacks [99,100].
MTD mechanisms are not new as they have been used in conven-
tional networks. However, in these traditional architectures, the im-
plementation of MTD requires the reconfiguration and synchronization
of network devices, interrupting the current communication sessions,
evidencing low efficiency and high cost. Using SDN architecture that
offers a highly flexible and dynamic programmable network, we can
deploy specialized network applications and services to create robust
MTD systems.
The adaptive modification ofIP addresses and ports of hostscan pre-
vent recognizing-based attacks like man-in-the-middle and port scan-
ning attacks [101]. We canrandomly replace the sourceanddestination
IP address of packets with virtual IP addresses in the SDN switches,
which enhances the unpredictability of the network behavior [102].
The selection of dynamic routes provides significant advantages to
avoid adversaries eavesdrop on the network links or launch DDoS/DoS
attacks on certain network links. However, they are still predictable
and cannot provide resilience against intelligent adversaries. The use
of random routing mutation (RRM) techniques can effectively defend
the network while satisfying the performance and QoS requirements of
the network [103]. Also, data of various users can be mixed, among
different routes, making it difficult for attackers to recover complete
data from one communication and avoiding attackers to separate data
for a single user [104].
The lack of dynamism on the mutation cycles of RRM methods
and their difficulty to search for an optimal mutation routing path
represents a weakness against advanced adversarial. To deal with these
problems, the generation of the routing paths can be specified and
solved as an optimization problem, considering the constraints of rout-
ing paths’ randomness and network load balance [105]. SDN facilitates
this approach, given its global network monitoring and in-line network
configuration.
The limitation of the MTD mechanisms is the scalability since they
require monitoring the network state in real-time, which means a high
burden on the controller and a high charge on the control channel to
gather the statistics from the switches.
From the proactive security approaches, MTD solutions have been
more studied. Nevertheless, further efforts are required to obtain scal-
able solutions. These mechanisms demand high capacities of com-
putational processing and storage to maintain their dynamism. As
a result, it provides adaptability against zero-day and intelligent at-
tacks. The combination of MTD with Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) technology enables the Self-configuration and self-optimization
capabilities.
5.2. Network function virtualization (NFV)
NFV is a network architecture paradigm that virtualizes different
network node functions, making these network functions (NFs) and
services much more adaptive and scalable. NFV can significantly re-
duce the hardware cost, greatly improve operation efficiency, and
dramatically shorten the development of the lifecycle of a network
service [106].
Although SDN and NFV are two distinct and independent technolo-
gies, combining them in a network can bring multiple advantages to
emerging technologies. SDN provides centralized knowledge about the
network status and programmability, whereas NFV boosts the develop-
ment of virtualized network appliances executed on top of commodity
servers [107].
Next, we review new strategies to defend networks using SDN and
NFV. Work in [108] presents a proactive defense against complex
DDoS attacks. This approach uses virtual networks (VN) to dynamically
reallocate the network resources without disrupting the network service
or violating the VN properties. The components of this solution are
(1) the correct-by-construction VN migration planning and (2) the VN
migration mechanism. The former implements and solves a constraint
satisfaction problem using Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT). The
second component controls the execution of the VN migration strat-
egy on a virtualized physical network. This component handles all
movement logistics, including the precise sequencing/scheduling of the
steps’ realization to complete the move and the timing of such process.
The solution was tested against a crossfire attack. It showed high
effectiveness in restoring the downgraded bandwidth because of the
DDoS attack through the timely migration to a safety threat placement.
Work in [109] proposes a defense system for IoT networks based on
SDN and NFV. A reinforcement learning agent is used to evaluate the
risks of potential attacks and take optimal actions to mitigate them.
SHIELD [110] was a project funded by the European Union to
develop a security framework that offers Security-as-a-Service (SaS).
SHIELD applied NFV/SDN for virtualization and dynamic placement of
virtualized security functions in the network. In combination with Big
Data analytics, it allows for real-time incident detection and mitigation.
The controller can dynamically reconfigure the Virtualized Network
Security Functions based on the recommendations issued by the Big
Data analytic.
MTD using SDN/NFV has also been explored. Work in [111] pro-
poses an SDN/NFV-based MTD mechanism using multiple fuzzy sys-
tems and a proxy virtual network function (VNF) to achieve DDoS
detection and mitigation. The fuzzy logic is used as an SDN application
to detect whether traffic from an external network is DDoS traffic.
NFV is used to implement a virtual relay node to prevent DDoS traffic
directly affecting the target server. When an attack is not occurring,
a module called reverse proxy VNF serves as a relay transmission
between the user and the target server, thus transferring the DDoS
attack surface. When an attack occurs, a mechanism based on SDN tech-
nology segregates suspicious traffic from legitimate traffic, redirecting
suspicious traffic to a restricted node or dropping them.
Work in [112] proposes various NFV-enabled virtual shadow net-
works used in the MTD mechanisms implementation via route mu-
tation. The aim is to dynamically change the routes for specific re-
connaissance packets to harden the attackers’ job of identifying the
current network topology for potential DDoS attacks while enabling
the defender to store potential attackers’ information through forensics.
This framework offers three MTD strategies to obfuscate the network
topology information for thwarting indirect DDoS attacks at the recon-
naissance phase. (1) to mute the routes of the real network to the real
host destination, (2) to use virtual shadow network (VSN) (e.g., virtual
honeypot) as the mirror network and use of one of the VSN as the
destination of the route mutation, and (3) to use the VSN as an overlay
network while the destination of the route mutation is the real host.
In each cycle, a roulette wheel selection mechanism selects the MTD
strategy using different predefined mutation probabilities. Also, the
VSN placement uses a heuristic topology-aware algorithm.
Work in [113] proposes a topology mutation technique combining
NFV and SDN to make the attack surface dynamic. The aim is to create
a virtualized network architecture that can transform itself in real-time
by dynamically introducing virtual components and rearranging the
network’s logical structure. Under this dynamic system, an attacker
finds it complicated and costly to eavesdrop on network packets or
monitor the network traffic to acquire the network topology. Also, the
authors proposed honeypots to obtain a better security response.
Additionally, works in [106,114] surveyed other recent SDN/NFV
based security approaches. NFV-based security solutions provide on-
demand network programmability, energy efficiency, and mobility sup-
port, characteristics that are relevant to IoT networks.
One big concern of the NFV paradigm is that new generation
networks are large-scale and have strict speed, latency, and resource-
efficiency requirements. Software-based data plane functions could
introduce unacceptable delays. Therefore, recent studies have proposed
different solutions for high-speed packet processing in user-space, using
common off-the-shield (COTS) hardware [115,116]. In addition, it is
important to mention the vector packet processing (VPP) [115,117]
framework that is a kernel-bypass method, which provides flexibility
(multiprogramming) with hardware-comparable packet processing per-
formance by using techniques of batch processing. VPP can leverage
a general-purpose CPU to process packets in a vectorized fashion,
which is highly efficient. Consequently, VPP provides full network
functionalities of layers 2, 3, and above. The nature of VPP-enabled
VNFs will provide the open-access, software-based, scalable, and high-
performance capabilities to deploy automated security solutions in
SDN-based networks.
NFV promises several advantages to defend the networks proac-
tively. However, it can demand high computation and storage re-
sources. In addition, NFV has been presented before, jointly with
other mechanisms, to provide self-configuration and self-optimization
capabilities. That is, in combination with other strategies studied in
this paper, NFV can potentially provide complete security automation.
However, research in this area is still emerging. Therefore, many chal-
lenges remain unsolved, such as optimal selection and deployment of
SDN/NFV-based security mechanisms and optimal orchestration over
different network domains [3].
5.3. Cyber deception
Another type of proactive defense mechanism is cyber deception.
Deception tools distribute a collection of traps and decoys across a
system architecture to imitate genuine assets. Unlike MTD, deception
methods introduce uncertainty for the attacker without changing the
actual surface but instead creating a virtual attack surface [118]. They
provide adversaries with an incorrect view of the target system so
that attacks based on such wrong information are likely to fail and
present an opportunity for detection [118,119]. Examples of deception
tools are simple honeypot systems. Modern deception tools require
analytics and automation methods to make them simple to deploy
but effective for thwarting attacks. The capabilities of SDN provide
an opportunity to design an optimized and autonomous solution for
network defense, which can permit advanced use cases of the decep-
tion platform such as integrated, proactive threat hunting, and active
attacker engagement [120].
Works in [121,122] proposed reconnaissance deception systems
(RCSs) to defend from malicious discovery and reconnaissance attacks
in computer networks. These systems use SDN to simulate complete
virtual network topology, thus achieving an effective defense strategy
against adversarial reconnaissance. Work in [123] proposes an SDN-
based framework for unobtrusively integrating decoy services into
production workloads. The SDN technology divides a production net-
work into segments of production and decoy. Attackers are redirected
to decoys, which have the same configuration as the protected pro-
duction system. Therefore, the attackers never reach the protected
assets.
MimePot [124] is a cyber–physical honeypot conceived for indus-
trial control networks. This security framework can simulate physical
processes operations of Industrial Control Systems to capture intricate
cyber–physical attacks using SDN technology. Work in [118] proposes
a cyber deception system to combat cyber adversaries in a wireless vir-
tualization framework. In this wireless framework, the SDN controller
continuously monitors the network traffic, observes the connections,
and creates mobile virtual network operators (MVNO). Additionally,
it directs cyber adversaries towards deception MVNO. Work in [125]
proposes a security framework with adaptive defense. This solution
protects key nodes based on game theory (GT) through the formulation
of a multistage game by using the architectural advantages of SDN.
Moreover, it considers deceptive behaviors of the cyber defender in
different stages.
Work in [126] presents a cyber deception solution that implements
defenses against penetration attacks using a decoy chain development
(DCD) method based on the combination of NFV and SDN. In this
defense architecture, the SDN controller monitors the security status
of the whole network and can detect possible attack sources using
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) technology. Moreover, using SDN
technology, the DCD can deploy decoy chains in the generic servers
on the DP to change the attack surface, based on the global network
status and under resource constraints and multiple attack sources. NFV
helps to deploy dynamic service delivery in the network.
The goal of the security framework KAGE [127] goes beyond the
implementation of sophisticated honeypots or MTD mechanisms to dy-
namically defend the system. KAGE expanded into a new area of active
defensive deception, where the adversary’s decision loop is deliberately
manipulated by proactive and reactive adaptation of the environment
as KAGE learns about the capabilities and intents of the client that
KAGE is engaging. That is, a detected intrusion does not result in block-
ing or shutting down connections. Instead, KAGE seamlessly moves the
adversary’s interactions into an alternate reality, where the adversary
abides unproductively engaged for a long time, distracted from the real
target.
Deception mechanisms have demonstrated the potential to improve
the security automation in networks but, at the same time, optimizing
the resources. However, this area still lacks further development. The
costs and benefits of deception in defense need rigorous evaluations
before practical use [127,128]. For instance, a cost would result in
an equilibrium point between the security of having more deceptive
virtual subnets and the increased delay of sending packets through
virtual devices. The proper allocation of honeypots in the network to
achieve better defense and resource utilizationis also an important area
to be further explored.
Combining deception techniques with NFV can provide all the self-*
capabilities. However, this area requires further effort.
5.4. Network slicing (NS)
Network slicing strategies promise effective solutions such as dy-
namic QoS/QoE management [27] for IoT and 5G/6G [7,129] tech-
nologies. Network slicing allows to isolate different traffics to maintain
security and reliability in the network [3]. Each slice is isolated and
has diverse network functions and virtual resources. Thus, individual
network applications and services can run on each slice, with different
levels of security required by individual slices. The combination of
SDN and NFV on network slicing can support the design of advanced
security solutions with fined-grained security features, such as per-
application traffic flow [129,130]. Still, further research efforts are
required to achieve the required granularity protection, with dynamic
and flexible management, and at the same time maintaining a low cost
of implementation.
Network slicing, combined with SDN and NFV, promises to enable
all self-* capabilities needed to obtain a fully automated solution.
Furthermore, all techniques previously studied, including reactive and
proactive solutions, can be integrated into each slice, thus providing
a comprehensive security solution for new generation networks. How-
ever, this area is emerging, and strong efforts are required to obtain
such solutions.
5.5. Blockchain-assisted SDN
In recent years, Blockchain technology has been explored to design
more scalable, efficient, decentralized, secure, and trustworthy SDN
architectures [131–135]. Blockchain enables verification information
transactions via distributed network authorization and, subsequently,
it adds that data to an unalterable ledger. That is, unknown entities
can communicate with each other without a trusted third party (con-
troller). The decentralization eliminates control by a single controller,
removing the risk of single-point failures. In addition, since each infor-
mation transaction is public, this technology offers a reliable and easily
verifiable infrastructure [136–138].
Given the decentralization property and continuous nodes/users/
information-transaction verification, blockchain can help to preventthe
most common and disruptive attacks in SDN-based networks, namely,
DDoS attacks. The primary use of this technology is to solve the
consensus and synchronization problem of multiple distributed SDN
controllers [132,139] and enable trustworthy controller/switch associ-
ations [140,141]. Nevertheless, we consider blockchain as a proactive
mechanism since it ensures the executed transactions in the network
must be approved and verified by all participating nodes, which cre-
ates irrefutable records to avoid data tampering and double-spending
problems and ensure ledger consistency [139,142]. For instance, the
blockchain technology integration into SDN provides capabilities to
prevent IoT devices from being used as botnets that launch DDoS
attacks [143].
Blockchain-enabled SDN is an emergent area of study. Still, many
challenges remain unsolved in thistechnology [136]. A relevant issue is
that pragmatically a blockchain may require a long time, even hours, to
complete the update of all ledgers. This issue willcause delays and raise
uncertainty for participating nodes. Moreover, storing a blockchain in
OF switches requires memory resources in large numbers, which can
become a bottleneck as the size of the blockchain increases [144].
In addition, the cost of computational power and energy of some
consensus mechanisms can be prohibitive for organizations or groups
interested in adopting blockchain technology.
Finally, blockchain is adaptive to new internal or external changes
making it more robust to novel and complex attacks. Also, this strategy
can enable security self-configuration. Self-optimized security solutions
using blockchain and SDN require further development.
Table 3 shows a comparison of SDN-based proactive security solu-
tions described before. It is noticeable that some proposals combined
two or more proactive technologies/techniques to defend the networks
from advanced attacks. In addition, it is fundamental to recognize
the use of different AI techniques in the majority of these proactive
solutions.
6. Analysis and comparison
In this section, we compare the complexity and level of automa-
tion of the techniques described before and present their common
application areas.
6.1. Complexity and level of automation
Table 4 ranks proactive and reactive SDN-based security solutions,
which summarizes the findings of the complexity and level of automa-
tion of the classes analyzed previously.
As described before, the complexity analysis includes the computa-
tional and storage resources and the expertise required to implement a
technique. We analyze the automation level in function of the self-* ca-
pabilities that each strategy enables. In the case of self-adaptation, the
analysis considered two factors: the adaptability to mitigate or prevent
zero-day attacks and the ability to defeat AI-enabled adversaries.
In the case of complexity and adaptability capabilities, we provide
a Null, Low, Medium, High, and Advanced ranking to assess how the
SDN-based security solutions stack up against one another. Regarding
self-healing, self-configuration, and self-optimization properties, we
assign Yes (Y) or No (N) checks, which indicate whether a technique en-
ables the corresponding feature. Furthermore, we include the progress
of the strategies, which shows their development status.
In general, we identify that solutions with a high level of automa-
tion demand more complex designs, which implies more computation
and storage capability requirements. Also, we note that the reactive
solutions have been more explored than the proactive solutions, which
still lacks the study of an optimal trade off between performance
and accuracy on defending SDN-based networks. The adaptability of
proactive solutions against zero-day attacks, adversarial environments,
and AI-enabled attacks is advanced since these methods constantly
evolve to minimize/eliminate attack surfaces. However, the elevated
demand for computational resources is a common problem of proactive
solutions. This condition may further limit the scalability of these
solutions. Nevertheless, most of these techniques are emerging, and
their explorations in the coming years will potentially solve these
issues.
Finally, we recognized that NFV technology and AI are crucial
to enable the self-configuration and self-optimization properties of
almost all reactive and proactive security solutions. Techniques of
RL, adversarial learning, MTD, cyber deception, and network slicing
cannot provide a self-optimized or self-configured security solution
without NFV, which provides the flexibility to deploy (virtual) network
functions on-demand andin real-time. Moreover, AI helps to remember,
learn, and improve any strategy outcome that implements it.
Note that even the sophisticated design could not achieve complete
independence of humans to supervise them. Still, more efforts are
needed in this area to obtain more automated solutions. For instance,
combining detection-based solutions with proactive solutions could
result in an effective defense that entails minimal or no human in-
tervention. However, it is essential to be aware that computational
resources are limited.
6.2. Application areas
Table 5 shows the typical application of each security solution.
Although we can implement all the studied defense solutions through
all types of SDN-enabled networks, their complexity of implementation
and unique advantages have made them focus on specific application
areas and network threats.
Reactive solutions become proper for next-generation SDN-based
firewalls [146] commonly used to protect data centers, campus net-
works, internet service providers (ISPs) infrastructure, and industrial
control systems (ICSs) [147]. Most reactive defense proposals center
on DDoS attacks, which are the most frequent and dangerous net-
work threats. Nevertheless, each technique can solve different levels
of sophistication of these attacks. Statistical methods can solve simple
DoS/DDoS and port scanning attacks. More complex DDoS threats
require the use of ML and DL methods. ML techniques render high
performance for network layer (high-volume) DDoS threats. DL ap-
proaches demonstrate better results for application-layer attacks such
as low-rate, slow-rate, and one-hit DDoS attacks. Online adaptation, RL,
and adversarial learning techniques can defeat even more sophisticated
APTs, including AI-enabled threats.
Proactive solutions occur more proper to protect new generation
networks, such as IoT, 5G, 6G, vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETS),
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) networks [148], etc. These networks
have in common that they are heterogeneous, dynamic, and large-scale,
making them hard to meet the strict requirements, such as low latency,
high reliability, high mobility, top security, and enormous connectivity.
DDoS attacks are the most common and disruptive threats in these
transitional networks. Other threats treated by proactive solutions are
eavesdrop, sniffer, botnets prevention. The heterogeneity of the devices
could hinder the use of reactive solutions in these networks since
they can expose to numerous FPs. Thus, preventing threats rather than
mitigating them could be a better strategy in these complex systems.
We also observed that almost all proactive security solutions work in
combinations. Examples of these combinations are MTD-NFV, MTD-
Cyber Deception, NF-Network Slicing, MTD-NFV-Cyber Deception, and
Blockchain assisted-NFV-Network Slicing-NFV, as shown in Table 3.
Finally, we highlight that proactive and reactive solutions can be
combined for their application in different scenarios. For instance, ML
and DL can enable more effective and optimized proactive solutions.
And conversely, NFV could bring the automation capability to the
reactive solutions.
7. Discussion
We studied reactive and proactive strategies that pursue security
automation in SDN-based networks. Applying these solutions to di-
minish the effects of attacks is powerful, but those solutions can have
some drawbacks that sophisticated attacks can exploit to beat them.
Once the attacker gains access to the system, proactive solutions can-
not thwart them. Therefore, the detection-based mechanisms remain
relevant. Worthwhile approaches can combine reactive and proactive
strategies to automate the security solution in SDN-based networks. An
automatic security solution can follow the rule: Prevent everything you
can, everything you cannot prevent, investigate, detect, and mitigate fast.
The SDN-based security solution for networks is expected to beauto-
mated in the coming years. Such solutions must consider all advantages
and limitations of the SDN architecture. A solution proposal that does
not consider the effects on the network performance, such as the bot-
tleneck to collect packets for analysis, will not be scalable. Also, there
is a need for a proper evaluation of the network defense mechanisms.
The proposals reviewed in this survey used partial and different metrics
to assess their efficiency in protecting networks. A good practice is to
use a standard evaluation system of security solutions for networks
based on the SDN paradigm. Next, we analyze the scalability and
assessment factors, which we consider essential elements to different
security proposals before their implementation in production networks.
Finally, we discuss open problems to manage automation.
7.1. Scalable SDN-based security solutions
Most of the SDN-based security solutions revised throughout this
survey propose to perform main processes in the AP. The controller
is in charge of capturing data from DP through an SBI protocol and
deploying the mitigation strategies on the physical devices. In this
way, the intelligent approach leverages the computational and storage
resources of the SDN controller, as well as its global visibility and
centralized control.
However, this approach can limit the scalability of the different
security solutions and even introduce new vulnerabilities to DoS/DDoS
attacks. That is, as the traffic demand of modern networks increases,
analyzing all of these packets with a security system at wire speeds
will be challenging using sophisticated algorithms, ensuring at the same
time high accuracy.
Effective SDN-based security solutions require considering the op-
timization of different resources to provide scalability. Fig. 6 shows
specific strategies to add scalability to SDN-based security solutions,
which we discuss in the following.
7.1.1. Traffic sampling
Sampling techniques reduce the flow of data gathering from the
controller and minimize the communication required between switches
and the controller, thus easing the CP overload in the vast network
traffic condition. The sampling period is critical in sampling strate-
gies. The samples’ requests must be periodic in short time intervals
since long intervals are impractical for accurate and rapid detection
of anomalies. The attack events appearing over a time scale inferior to
the one selected for traffic sampling will make the security control rule
useless.
Improvements to the sampling strategy include adaptive flow collec-
tion [149]. The improper implementation of sampling methods com-
promises the accuracy of threats detection, given the relevant flows
missing probability.
7.1.2. Stateful SDN
We can solve the scalability of the Open SDN architecture by keep-
ing data flows in the DP as much as possible to maintain the controller’s
safety and reduce the burden of the controller and SBI bandwidth.
In a stateful SDN architecture, the switches make independent for-
warding decisions based on their local flow state information without
contacting the controller [150]. The facts that supported the develop-
ment of the stateful SDN architecture include:
Stateful architecture can helpto effectively reduce the impact onthe
network performance during DoS/DDoS attacks [151–156]. Further,
the P4 technology [157] and VPP-based VNFs will enable intelligence
in switches, to obtain an open-access, automated and scalable security
solution.
7.1.3. Cooperative control and data plane
It is important to note that sophisticated attacks, such as slow DDoS
attacks, might be troublesome to detect using local switches’ informa-
tion, meaning that stateful SDN architecture could not be efficient. A
cooperative intelligence between DP and CP could potentially minimize
the effects of advanced DoS/DDoS attacks on network performance [89,
158,159]. In this approach, the stateful switches commonly perform
coarse-grained detection to determine suspicious flows and send them
to the controller. The controller leverages its computation capabilities
to perform fine-grained classification of attacks and propose defense
strategies. Finally, the switches react to mitigate the attacks, according
to rules installed by the controller.
It is essential to design the cooperation mechanisms between the DP
and CP carefully and effectively. Switches with some additional/special
modules or a new component like DP cache, will increase the network
complexity and the overall cost [34]. Moreover, it will be unrealistic to
run complex detection algorithms, such as ML, DL, MTD, etc., within
the switches. Usually, the SDN controller runs these algorithms. Nev-
ertheless, switches could only perform coarse-grained attack detection
and take independent actions if required.
7.1.4. Distributed SDN deployment
Distributing monitoring capability in a multi-controller environ-
ment [160–162] could also enable the scalability of an SDN-based
security solution. The architecture of multi-controllers can operate on
either a two-level hierarchical controller or a distributed controller
system.
Hierarchical or distributed architectures face the bottleneck prob-
lem when the network size becomes large, and the applications running
require advanced processing and analysis to operate their function-
alities in the network. Hierarchical controller architecture can still
produce bottlenecks for large networks, and the distributed controller
scheme can present synchronization overheads [153]. Besides, in net-
work environments that require diversity in SDN controllers, such as
in IoT, having a backup controller for each controller may become
costly, thus resulting in non-scalable and complex solutions [163].
The optimized deployment of multi-controller environments is still an
unsolved challenge.
The emerging NFV technology can enable the scalability and flex-
ibility factors of SDN-based security solutions since NFV deploys dif-
ferent virtual functions (VFs) on-demand and on the fly. In addition,
NFV enables openness through vendor lock-in alleviation, which is
currently a factor affecting the deployment of holistic, comprehensive,
and flexible automated solutions.
All the strategies discussed can be combined to obtain a scalable
and automated security solution.
7.2. Evaluation of SDN-based solutions
It is tough to find many studies with an evaluation that is both
comprehensive and realistic. Various works give many results on a wide
range of performance metrics, using small test networks, lacking the
realism of implementation. Other works try to build a large topology
using simulation tools but run into some issues due to the limitations of
the environment. Without a strong evaluation, one cannot fully assess
the benefit and overhead associated with a new system, so the practical
applicability of a given solution usually remains in question [39].
The evaluation of critical parameters such as the traffic added by the
method, the processing and memory demands, the changes require-
ments in the current architecture of SDN, or the level of automation
of the proposed method, can help to define if the technique provides
crucial benefits when deployed in a production network.
The most common metrics used to validate SDN-based security
solutions for networks, particularly those based on the threat detec-
tion/mitigation approach, are accuracy, recall, F-score, FPs rate, ROC
curve, and detection rate. Since these metrics are related to the clas-
sifier performance used on the threat detection, they only allow a
partial assessment of the overall conditions existing in the network.
Besides using the classification metrics, we can evaluate the SDN-based
security solutions using other performance metrics, as described in the
following.
Table 6 defines a set of parameters and metrics to evaluate the
network security design using SDN effectively.
Firstly, reactive solutions are mainly evaluated based on the perfor-
mance of threats detection and mitigation. In addition to the standard
classification metrics, we can quantify the preprocessing effectiveness,
the models’ training time, the robustness on attack detection, the ratio
of malicious traffic blocked, and the legitimate packet loss rate.
The flexibility parameter is also significant since integral security
solutions will provide a more complete and holistic system to defend
the network.
Moreover, all security proposal designs must consider the scalability
component. A sophisticated security system could not be scalable,
whereas a simple one could be ineffective for advanced attacks. The
mechanism of security must have a trade off between effectiveness and
scalability. Direct metrics to assess the scalability property of a security
solution include the end-to-end communication delay, the controller
CPU and memory usage, the switches TCAM usage, the throughput, and
the additional traffic on the network. The analysis of the algorithms’
complexity (preprocessing, detection, and mitigation algorithms) using
big O notation can be helpful in the proper definition of the scalability
factor of a specific solution.
The effectiveness and scalability of a security solution must not
affect the quality of experience (QoE) provided to legitimate users. The
QoE can be measured using the QoS of legitimate users, using surveys
with automatic tools.
A crucial evaluation parameter is the degree of automation of the se-
curity solution, which measures the system’s human independence. We
can evaluate the ability of a solution to enable specific self-* properties.
Maintaining the right balance of machine-powered security automa-
tion and human intervention will empower security professionals to
effectively and efficiently carry out incident responses.
A fundamental evaluation parameter is the implementation and
deployment complexity of a security solution. Too complex solutions
will result in time-consuming solution deployment and locked to highly
skilled developers.
Finally, the cost is a fundamental parameter that could limit the
implementation of revolutionary ideas. All solution approaches need
to analyze the financial cost that the proposal could have. The re-
quirement of additional hardware or software, the elevated energy con-
sumption, and the network administrators’ training campaigns could be
costly.
It is essential to recognize the need to optimize all the parameters
before indicated, which will allow an automated security solution to be
scalable at a low cost. A trade off between the large-term advantages of
a security solution design and its associated costs will define whether
to implement this solution in a specific production network.
7.3. Open problems
SDN-like architectures can certainly automate different solutions
in modern network environments. According to the Cisco Report of
Global Networking Trends [164] for 2020, almost 60% of data centers
use some form of SDN. Moreover, for 2021 the SDN and NFV tech-
nologies combination will be transporting near 44% of traffic within
enterprise data centers. Finally, this report highlighted that the current
best investment areas in networking trends are AI and security. We
note that both academia and industry are working further to find
automated security solutions with convergent ideas. However, these
two stakeholders need to raise their level of cooperation to boost the
creation of automated networks defense.
We also noted that almost all the security proposals included in
this survey did not consider applying to multi-controller, multi-domain,
and hybrid environments. A functional and automated security solu-
tion must recognize that new network environments manage massive
traffic and devices and provide new services with different security
requirements. Such network environments will require more than one
controller (physical or virtual) and will operate with multiple domains.
In addition, there is a need of more studies analyzing the practicality of
SDN-based security solutions for partial SDN deployment, also known
as hybrid networks [165,166], and design methods to be effective in
such a situation. The automation of security in these contexts needs
further development.
8. Challenges and future directions to network security automa-
tion
8.1. P4 enabling automation
We stated that one strategy to scale the automated security solution
is to add intelligence to forwarding devices. Conventional switches
and OF-based switches will require additional appliances to enable
their intelligence, which will increase the cost and complexity of the
solution.
P4 is a domain-specific language for programming the data plane of
network devices [157]. The objective of P4 is to obtain a software-based
programmable forwarding device. P4 brings significant advantages
such as flexibility and expressiveness to implement sophisticated and
hardware-independent packet processing algorithms. The most popu-
lar open-source controllers OpenDaylight and ONOS, are working to
support P4 in their southbound interface [167,168].
P4 allows sophisticated applications implementations such as ad-
vanced traffic engineering, firewalls, or IDS/IPS solutions in the data
plane. Furthermore, P4 can potentially support Blockchain data struc-
ture, achieving the security-by-design capability of this emerging tech-
nology [169]. These characteristics bring fundamental advantages to
a security solution to reduce the processing burden on the controller
and the reduction of DDoS attack surfaces. In summary, P4 will boost
SDN, NFV, and Blockchain technologies to create more sophisticated
solutions required to automate the network defense, maintaining the
desired scalability, simplicity, low costs, and openness. The same pur-
poses are attempted through the formulation of COTS hardware-based
VNF, such as the VPP. We can shortly expect intelligent data planes
that boost open, high-performance, and automated networks security
solutions.
8.2. Orchestration for a comprehensive security solution
The SDN-based security solutions presented in this survey try to
solve a single security threat without manual intervention. However,
multiple threats could occur at the same time. Therefore, implementing
isolated security solutions to automate network defense could result in
redundant functions in many of their subsystems (such as collecting
information), the execution of inconsistent tasks, or conflicts with
other non-security-related network applications. The SDN controller
can execute the automated security solutions in a purposeful order
and verify the success of each task. Besides, integrating all network
security solutions in a unique framework, one can achieve autonomy
and resilience in the overall network operation. This structure is known
as orchestration, which can solve rule conflicts generated by different
security applications, also merge and simplify similar tasks. In short, an
SDN-based security orchestrator can enable an automated, robust, and
holistic defense solution with optimized resources utilization.
One example of implementing SDN-based orchestration is to use
the modern architecture named Service Function Chaining (SFC) [170],
which is the mostpromising way to process the packets in pre-described
order of VNFs. SFC provides a specific network service to the user and
satisfies end-to-end QoS constraints [171]. The SFC and NFV technolo-
gies integration in SDN-based architecture can help us to provide a
holistic and self-checking security framework [171,172], which has op-
timal resources utilization, even in multi-domain environments [173].
Intent-based networking (IBN) is another tool enabling SDN-based
security orchestration, which can continuously enforce our defense
policies while optimizing network resources. The purpose of IBN is to
introduce a deeper level of intelligence and intended state insights to
networking, which augments the automation capabilities of SDN [164,
174]. IBN allows network administrators to tell the SDN-controller
what outcome they want (business intent) instead of coding and execut-
ing individual tasks, which can be more challenging, time-consuming,
and error-prone. The SDN-controller will perform resource allocation
and policy enforcement to achieve the objective. Thus, IBN simplifies
the implementation of SDN-based security solutions and their remedi-
ation and assurance. Moreover, IBN can integrate SDN, NFV, and AI
to provide fully automated solutions considering the network state, the
dynamic state of all users and applications, the service performance
and security requirements, and the business needs across all domains.
Although several studies, such as the presented in [175], have focused
their research on IBN-enabled attack protection for SDN networks,
more efforts are needed.
9. Conclusion
There are multiple approaches to solve the security problem in
SDN-based networks. In this document, we survey them with the vi-
sion of automation of defense mechanisms to protect networks using
SDN technology. The nature of programmable and centralized con-
trol of SDN enables this technology to generate scalable, optimized,
intelligent, and automated security solutions to defend networks. We
categorized the SDN-based security reviewed into two classes: reactive
defense based on attack detection and proactive protection based on
in-line network reconfiguration. The reactive solutions, which use ML,
DL, and RL methods, mitigates sophisticated attacks. The state-of-
the-art proactive security solutions implement mechanisms like MTD
defense, Cyber Deception, Network Slicing, and Blockchains combined
with NFV capabilities and intelligent algorithms. Strategies of Rein-
forcement Learning, Network Slicing, and Blockchain-assisted are still
facing fundamental challenges, such as scalability for their adoption in
production networks.
We found that reactive and proactive mechanisms can enable differ-
ent levels of automation (self-* capabilities) and even can be combined
to achieve automated security solutions. Nevertheless, it is important
to identify the complexity needed to implement them, translated to
deployment costs. We provided a ranking of the security solutions
that reveal the automation level enabled by each strategy and the
complexity related to their implementation.
Also, we discussed the scalability factor and the parameters needed
for the comprehensive assessment of the security solution proposals.
With this evaluation, we can identify the advantages, limitations, and
associatedcosts, ofasecurity solution and decide whether to implement
it in specific production networks.
We hope that our discussions and exploration give readers a pro-
found grasp of how the SDN paradigm is pushing the creation of inno-
vative and automated security solutions for next-generation networks,
which we believe is the ultimate goal of SDN technology.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
