Title:
Arti?cial Intelligence
Abstract:

----------------------
Subtitles:

 2. Preliminaries
 3. TREPANReloaded
 otherwise.
 4. Understandability of decision trees
 5. Experimental evaluation
 6. Discussion
 7. Related work
 8. Conclusion and future works
 Extensions of previous work
 Declaration of competing interest
 AppendixA. Supplementary material


Text:
----------------------
In recent years, explainability has been identi?ed as a key factor for the adoption of AI systems in a wide range of 
contexts [11,22,29,39,43,55]. The emergence of intelligent systems in self-driving cars, medical diagnosis, insurance and ?-
nancial services among others has shown that is essential to provide an explanation to users, developers or regulators when 
decisions are taken or suggested by automated systems for practical, social, and increasingly also legal reasons. As a case in
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we present the foundations of our approach, namely, decision trees, the Trepan algorithm and formal 
ontologies.
2.1. Decision trees
A decision tree is a rooted, directed acyclic graph consisting of a set of split nodes, usually depicted as rectangles, and a 
set of leaves, usually depicted as ovals. Each split node in a decision tree has an associated logical test based on the features 
in the domain. When classifying an instance or example, the role of a split node is to assign the example to one of the 
outgoing branches of the node. Fig. 2 shows an example of a decision tree.
Split nodes may have several branches depending on whether the logical test is over binary, nominal, or real values 
attributes. The decision as to which branch is selected for an example is determined by the logical test of the node. In the 
simplest case, this test considers one feature, and thus the outcome of the test is determined by the value of that feature 
in the given example.
The way in which split nodes are selected amounts to optimising a reward function, the de?nition of which can vary 
depending on the type of induction algorithm used. In Trepan, the split selection is generally based on information gain. 
Given a set of features X ={X1, ..., Xn}, the information gain IG of a feature Xi w.r.t. a set of samples S is de?ned as
where Sj is the subset of samples in S that have value j of feature Xi and H(S) is the entropy of S, which is de?ned as
H(S) := ??c?C ||SSc|| log2 ||SSc||.
where Sc is the subset of example in S that belong to a class c. The performance of decision trees for classi?cation tasks is 
measured by accuracy, i.e., the fraction of predictions that agree with the ground truth.
In this paper, our objective is to improve the understandability of decision trees extracted by Trepan. To this end, we 
will extend the reward function of a feature Xi to take into account its role in an ontology, as detailed in Section 3.
2.2. TheTrepan algorithm
Trepan is a tree induction algorithm that recursively extracts decision trees from oracles, in particular from feed-forward 
neural networks [17]. The original motivation behind the development of Trepan was to approximate a neural network by 
means of a symbolic structure that is more interpretable than a neural network classi?cation model. This was in the context 
of a wider interest in knowledge extraction from neural networks (see [63,19] for an overview).
end if
end for
end while
Trepan stops the tree extraction process when one of two criteria is met: no more nodes need to be further expanded 
because their entropy is low enough (they contain almost exclusively instances of a single class) or a prede?ned limit of 
the tree size (the number of nodes) is reached. While Trepan was designed to explain neural networks as the oracle, it is 
model-agnostic and can be used to explain any other classi?cation model.
In order to evaluate the performance of algorithms like Trepan that approximate an initial machine learning model with 
a so-called surrogate, we measure the accuracy and the ?delity of the resulting surrogate, i.e. the decision trees. Fidelity
is de?ned as the percentage of examples on which the classi?cation by a surrogate agrees with that by the initial model. 
Fidelity is more relevant here than accuracy, which compares to the ground truth, as it is the direct measure the goal of the 
surrogate model.
2.3. Ontologies
An ontology is a set of formulae in an appropriate logical language with the purpose of describing a particular domain 
of interests. The speci?c logic used is not crucial for our approach as the techniques introduced here apply to a variety of 
logics. For the sake of clarity we use description logics (DLs) as well-known ontology languages. We brie?y introduce the 
DL EL, a DL allowing only conjunctions and existential restrictions. For full details, see [2].
Syntactically, EL is based on two disjoint sets NC and NR of concept names and role names, respectively. The set of EL
concepts is generated by the grammar
C ::= A | C  C | ?R.C,
where A ?NC and R ?NR. A TBox is a ?nite set of general concept inclusions (GCIs) of the form C D where C and D are 
concepts. It stores the terminological knowledge describing the relationships between concepts. An ABox is a ?nite set of 
assertions C(a) and R(a, b), which express knowledge about objects in the knowledge domain. An ontology is composed by a 
TBox and an ABox. In this paper, we focus on the TBox only, thus we will use the terms ontology and TBox interchangeably.
The semantics of EL is based on interpretations of the form I=(I, ·I), where I is a non-empty domain, and ·I is a 
function mapping every individual name to an element of I, each concept name to a subset of the domain, and each role 
name to a binary relation on the domain. I satis?es C D iff CI ? DI and I satis?es an assertion C(a) (R(a, b)) iff aI ? CI
((aI, bI) ?RI). The interpretation I is a model of the TBox T if it satis?es all the GCIs and all the assertions in T . T is 
cIoonfs iTste. nWteif witr ihtae sC a ?mTodDelw. Gheivne nC twTo cDonacnedp tDs CTanCd. CD,i sC sitrs icsutlbys suumbseudmbeyd DbywD.r.wt. .rT.t. (TC (CTDT) Dif )C iIf ?C DTI foDr aenvder Cy ?mTodDel. 
We denote by L(EL, NC, NR) the set of (complex) concepts built over NC and NR in EL.
Fig. 1 shows an ontology excerpt modelling concepts and relations relevant to the loan domain. The precise formali-
sation of the domain is not relevant at this point; different formalisations may exist, with different levels of granularity. 
The ontology structures the domain knowledge from the most general concept (e.g., Entity) to more speci?c concepts 
(e.g., LoanApplicant, Female, etc.). The subsumption relation () induces a partial order among the concepts that can be 
built from a TBox T. For instance, the Quality concept is more general than the Gender concept, and it is more speci?c than 
the Entity concept.
We will capture the degree of generality (resp. speci?city) of a concept in terms of an information content measure that 
is based on concept re?nement. The measure is de?ned in detail in Section 3 and serves as the basis for the subsequent 
extension of the Trepan algorithm.
2.4. Concept re?nement
Specialisation re?nement operators take a concept C as input and return a set of descriptions that are more speci?c than C
by taking a TBox T into account. Re?nement operators for description logics were introduced in [37], and further developed 
in [10,64]. Several de?nitions of re?nement operators exist but our approach is independent of their speci?cs. The only 
requirement is that the operator is ?nite, that is, the set of re?nements computed by the operator is ?nite. When a speci?c 
re?nement operator is needed, as in the examples and in the experiments, we use the specialisation operator de?ned in 
what follows.
A re?nement operator is de?ned by three things: i) the (?nite) set of subconcepts that can be formed from a TBox T ; ii) 
the upward cover set of a concept C, and iii) a set of transformation rules de?ned over the structure of concept descriptions.
The ?nite set of subconcepts that can be built from the axioms of a TBox T is obtained by structural induction over the 
concept descriptions. This set is denoted by sub(T ) and is de?ned as follows.
De?nitsiuobn( 2T.1). :L=et{ T,b?e} a?n E?TBosxu. bT(hCe) ?sets uobf (sDub),concepts of T is given as
where sub is inductively de?ned over the structure of concept descriptions as follows:
sub(?r.C) := {?r.C} ? sub(C)
We also denote the set of subconcepts of a concept C by subConcepts(C).
Based on sub(T ), we de?ne the downcover set of atomic concepts and roles. sub(T ) guarantees the following downcover
set to be ?nite.3 The downcover sets of a concept C contain the most general subconcepts and roles found in sub(T ) that 
are more speci?c than (are subsumed by) C.
De?nition 2.2. Let T be an EL TBox, C a concept. The downcover sets of C w.r.t. T is:
DownCovT (C) := {D ? sub(T ) | D T C and .D? ? sub(T ) with D T D? T C}.
Given the previous de?nitions a specialisation re?nement operator for EL concepts can be de?ned as follows.
?T0 (C) := {C},
ope?rTa?t(oCr )?i?Ts (tChe) isse t? nofit esu, bancodn icte tpetrsm oifn Catews. r(.it..e .T, ?. W ?e? w?Ti(lCl )d)e. nFootre at hdiest aseilte db ya nsuablyCsiosn coef ppt(roCp).e rStiinecse o sf urbe(?Tn)emise an t? onipteer asetot,r st hine 
DLs we refer to [37,10].
Example 1. Let us consider the concepts Entity, and LoanApplicant de?ned in the ontology in Fig. 1. Then:
3. TREPANReloaded
Our aim is to create decision trees that are more understandable for humans by prioritising more understandable features 
in the tree generation process. Our hypothesis, which we will validate in this study, is that features are more understandable 
if they relate to more general concepts present in an ontology.
To measure the degree of semantic generality or speci?city of a concept, we consider its information content [59] as 
typically adopted in computational linguistics [54]. Classical information theoretic approaches compute the information 
content of a concept as the inverse of its frequency in a corpus, so that infrequent terms are considered more informative 
and less general than frequent ones.
In ontologies, the information content can be computed either extrinsically from the concept occurrences (e.g., [54]), or 
intrinsically, according to the number of subsumed concepts modelled in the ontology. Here, we adopt the latter approach. 
We use this information content measure to prioritise features that are more general (thus presenting less information 
content), as our hypothesis is that the decision tree becomes more understandable when it uses more general concepts.
De?nitIiCo(nX 3i).1:. =Gi???ve10n? anl oogn(to|lsloouggb(yC| soTunb,c (tehTpet) s|i)n(Xfoir)m|)atiiooftnhX eicro?wnstieusneb.t( Tof) a feature Xi is de?ned as:
where subConcepts(Xi) is the set of specialisations for Xi, and sub(T) is the set of subconcepts that can be built from the
With this method to compute the information content of a feature Xi, we now propose to update the information gain 
used by Trepan to give preference to features with a lower information content.
De?nition 3.2. The info{rmation gain given the information content IC of a feature Xi is de?ned as:
otherwise.
where IG(Xi, S) is the information gain as de?ned in Eq. (1).
IG? of a feature is reduced compared to IG by a proportion that varies depending on its information content, and it
4. Understandability of decision trees
• Understandability based on the syntactic complexity of a decision tree
• Understandability based on user performance and subjective ratings
5. Experimental evaluation
In our empirical evaluation, we ran user experiments on two datasets with a variety of tasks and different decision tree 
generation methods and sizes. We measured responses for evaluation of understandability.
5.1. Method
Materials. We used datasets from two different domains to evaluate our approach: ?nance and medicine. We used the
we developed an ontology de?ning the main concepts and relevant relations (the heart and loan ontology contained 29 
classes, 66 logical axioms and 28 classes, 65 logical axioms respectively). To extract decision trees using the Trepan and
Trepan Reloaded algorithm, we trained two arti?cial neural networks implemented in PyTorch. The neural networks we use 
in our experiments have a single layer of hidden units. The number of hidden units in each network is chosen using cross-
validation on the network’s training set, and we use a validation set to determine when to stop training networks. The test 
set accuracy achieved with the trained neural networks was of 85.98% and 94.65% for the loan and heart dataset respec-
Procedure. The experiment used two online questionnaires on the usage of decision trees.6 The questionnaires contained 
an introductory and an experimental phase.
In the introductory phase, subjects were shown a short video about decision trees, and how they are used for classi?ca-
tion. In this phase, participants were asked to provide information on their age, gender, education, and on their familiarity 
with decision trees.
The experiment was subdivided into four tasks: classi?cation, inspection, comparison and empowerment. Each task starts 
with an instruction page describing the task to be performed. In the ?rst two tasks the participants were presented with 
the six trees corresponding to one of the two domains. In the classi?cation task, subjects were asked to use a decision tree 
to assign one of two classes to a given case whose features are reported in a table (e.g., Will the bank grant a loan to a male
person, with 2 children, and a yearly income greater than e50.000,00?). In the inspection task, participants had to decide on the 
truth value of a particular statement (e.g., You are a male; your level of education affects your eligibility for a loan.). The main
• Correctness of the response.
Figs. 3 and 4 show the user interface with an example of classi?cation and inspection task respectively.
In the third task, the comparison, subjects were presented with a pair of trees of the same size, one extracted by Trepan
and one extracted by Trepan Reloaded. Subjects were asked to rate on a ?ve point scale which of the two trees is easier 
to understand. Each subject was presented with all three pairs of trees (small, medium, and large as de?ned above) in the 
selected domain. Fig. 5 shows an example of the comparison task.
In the fourth task, the empowerment task, respondents were shown a particular statement and had to decide what 
action (if any) they could take to change the decision of the model (e.g., You are a male and you have 3 children. According
to the decision tree, you are not eligible for a loan. Is there an action that you could take to become eligible?). The empowerment
Participants. 63 participants (46 females, 17 males) volunteered to take part in the experiment via an online survey.7 Of 
these, 34 were exposed to trees from the ?nance domain and 29 to those in the medical domain. The average age of the 
participants was 33 (± 12.23) years (range: 19–67). In terms of education, the highest level was a Ph.D. for 28 of them, a 
Master’s degree for 9 of them, a Bachelor’s for 12, and a high school diploma for 14. 47 of the respondents reported some 
familiarity with the notion of decision trees, while 16 reported no such familiarity.
5.2. Results
6. Discussion
As we anticipated, forcing the outputs of Trepan onto a pre-determined ontology as in Trepan reloaded impacts the 
?delity (and accuracy) of the resulting trees (see Table 3). However, the small compromise in the ?delity of the neural net-
work reconstruction (in both examples a drop of around one percent) will in many applications be more than compensated 
for by the substantial improvement in the ease with which humans can understand the resulting trees.
At this point, one might wonder why we should bother to create surrogate decision trees from black-box models, rather 
than inferring them directly from data. As already noticed in the original Trepan work [17], extracted trees from networks 
can actually result in better trees than those one would obtain by building the decision trees directly. To demonstrate 
this point, we also trained decision trees directly from the datasets using the classical C4.5 algorithm. Table 3 shows that 
the trees inferred by the Trepan variants are as accurate – if not more – than those inferred directly. Moreover, the trees 
built directly had syntactic complexities that roughly doubled those of the trees extracted using either Trepan variant (see 
Table 1). This indicates that constructing trees directly from the data results in trees substantially more complex than those 
extracted by Trepan variants, that nevertheless do not outperform them in the task.
There is a similarly small compromise in the accuracy of the decision trees (see Table 3). As we discussed above, in 
this approach the accuracy of the resulting trees (i.e., their ability to match ground truth) is less relevant than their ?delity 
(i.e., their ability to match the behaviour of the model we intend to explain). Nevertheless, our Trepan Reloaded method 
improves the understandability of the trees w.r.t. the original Trepan, while compromising little on the accuracy.
Apart from improving the understandability of (extracted) decision trees, ontologies also pave the way towards the 
capability of changing the level of abstraction of explanations to match different user pro?les or audiences. For instance, 
the level of technicality used in an explanation for a medical doctor or a fund manager should not be the same as that 
used for patients or banking customers. Therefore it is desirable to adapt explanations without changing the underlying 
explanation procedure. Ontologies are amenable to automated abstractions to improve understandability [34]. The idea 
of concept re?nement adopted here can be extended to operate on changing the de?nition of concepts and make them 
more general or more speci?c by means of re?nement operators [10,64,52]. This is a line of work that we ?nd a natural 
continuation of the current study.
In its current form, Trepan Reloaded requires a prede?ned ontology onto which the features used by our algorithm 
should be mapped. In such cases, which are common in many domains (e.g., medical, pharmaceutical, legal, biological, etc.), 
one can directly apply Trepan Reloaded to improve the quality of the explanations. Additional work beyond the scope of 
the current study, would be to automatically construct the most appropriate ontology to be mapped onto. Such a process 
could be achieved by automatically mapping sets of features into pre-existing general domain ontologies (e.g., MS Concept 
Graph [69], DBpedia [38], Freebase [6], YAGO [61], WordNet [42]). Many approaches have been proposed for extracting 
the schema of the tables, and mapping it to existing ontologies. For instance, Mulwad et al. [44,45] have made signi?cant 
contribution for interpreting tabular data using linked open data coming from independent domains. They proposed several 
approaches that use background knowledge from pre-existing general domain ontologies to infer the semantics of column 
headers, table cell values and relations between columns and represent the inferred meaning as graph of RDF triples.
The provision of some form of explicit knowledge, rather than being particular to our method, resides at the core of any 
attempts at human interpretable explanations. Whether such knowledge is in the form of a domain-speci?c ontology (as in 
this study), or as a domain-general one to be adapted ad-hoc, will depend on the particulars of speci?c applications. This 
limits the application in cases where features do not have a meaning speci?ed in an ontology, as it is necessary to build 
the semantic layer needed by our approach. However, this can even be done in cases where there are no prior concepts, as 
long as the concept can be structured and communicated to the user. For instance, in the case of image classi?cation using 
CNNs, where pixels do not have any semantics associated per se, features learned by ?lters in convolutional layer could be 
associated to semantic concepts. These concepts could then be used to create an interpretable model explaining what the 
CNNs learned.
The method proposed in this paper and other approaches (e.g., LIME [55], SHAP [60,40]) explain the role of features in 
decision making by creating surrogate models that are interpretable. These models usually have a low number of features in 
order to facilitate interpretation of the model. This approach becomes less effective for higher-dimensional feature spaces as 
there is an increasing trade-off between ?delity and interpretability. Here one could take advantage of domain knowledge 
and ontologies to group features into more abstract concepts, and use those to present more concise explanations.
7. Related work
Most approaches to interpretable machine learning focus either on building directly interpretable models, or on recon-
structing post-hoc local or global explanations [26]. Whilst local explanation methods aim to explain speci?c decisions,
global approaches aim to provide a more comprehensive understanding of how a model works. Our approach belongs to 
the category of post-hoc global explanation methods.
In local explanation methods, the individual predictions of a black-box model is approximated by generating local sur-
rogate models that are intrinsically interpretable. This strategy has been implemented for instance in the popular Local 
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) [55]. LIME perturbs the data for a given decisions and, after feeding the 
black-box model with perturbed data, creates a new linear model from the predictions. The linear model is reduced to k
factors using Lasso, generating a small set of coe?cients that constitute the explanation. The creation of an explainable 
surrogate is similar to our approach, but while LIME builds local surrogate models, our explanation is global and non-linear. 
A more recent approach to linear surrogate models is CLEAR: Counterfactual Local Explanations via Regression [66]. CLEAR 
provides counterfactual explanations by building on and extending two boundary (b-)counterfactuals and LIME. CLEAR pro-
vides b-counterfactuals that are explained by regression coe?cients including interaction terms, evaluates the ?delity of its 
local explanations to the underlying learning system, and uses the values of b-counterfactual. This achieves a better ?delity 
with respect to the black-box models’ decision boundaries. Several local explanation methods have been proposed based 
on Shapley values (e.g., [40,60]), which quantify the in?uence of a feature on a decision by training models on all subsets 
of features and observing their output depending on the presence of the given feature. Our method does not immediately 
provide feature importance values for individual decisions, but these could be obtained by analysing the tree and decision 
boundaries are explicit in generated trees.
The authors in [47] present Doctor XAI, a local model-agnostic technique suitable to explain black-box classi?ers that 
use multi-labelled, sequential, and ontology-linked data. In particular, they focus on explaining Doctor AI, a neural network 
classi?er that predicts a patient’s next visit time given the patient’s clinical history. The authors propose an explanation 
pipeline to generate post-hoc local explanations of these predictions. Each explanation is presented as a decision rule, which 
is extracted from a decision tree that is trained using a synthetic set of neighbours of the instance, for which the decision 
should be explained. The set of neighbours is arti?cially created either by sampling them from a normal distribution, or by 
exploiting the ontology linked to the data (e.g., the ICD-9 ontology). In this latter case, the ontology is used to calculate a 
?rst set of real neighbours using the similarity between patients, visits, and code diseases stored in the ontology. Then, this 
set of real neighbours is perturbed, by masking all the occurrences of the items with the same least common superconcept, 
to generate synthetic neighbours. The synthetic neighbours are then used to train the decision tree. The authors show that 
explanations generated using the ontology can have a higher ?delity than those generated without the use of the ontology. 
Explanations’ interpretability is measured by taking into account the syntactic complexity of the decision rules, and, thus, 
of the extracted trees. However, their human understandability is not directly tested.
In [53], concepts are used to group features and embed them into surrogate models in order to constrain the training. 
Concepts are created either by experts or by correlating existing features. The authors propose ConceptTrees, a version of
Trepan that builds on features belonging to concepts in the extraction of a decision tree. They compare surrogate trees 
extracted by ConceptTree with those extracted by the original version of Trepan. To evaluate their approach they use FRED-
MD, a macroeconomic database designed for empirical analysis of the US economy. The dataset comes with an associated 
taxonomy of the features that support the de?nition of concepts. While their results show that surrogate trees preserve 
accuracy and ?delity compared to original versions, the improvement in human understandability of explanations was 
not explicitly tested with users. As the authors point out, further research could involve a deeper assessment of their 
propositions, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Dhurandhar et al. [20] propose ProfWeight, a method designed to transfer information from a pre-trained deep learning 
model to a simpler one, e.g., a simpler neural network or a decision tree. ProfWeight is part of the IBM 360 Explainability 
Toolkit [1]. The idea behind this approach is to attach and train (linear) probes on the internal layers (corresponding to 
intermediate representations) of a high performing neural network. The trained probes allow building con?dence pro?les 
over the classi?ed examples, in such a way that harder examples are associated with weaker con?dence pro?les having 
lower con?dence weights. These weights are used to create a weighted version of the original dataset that is used to retrain 
the simpler model. The weights are essentially informing the simpler model on which examples to focus to improve its gen-
eralisation performance. The authors show the bene?ts of their approach in two scenarios, namely, digit recognition using 
the CIFAR dataset and a semi-conductor manufacturing setting in which ProfWeight is used to improve the performances 
of decision trees. The main motivation behind this approach is not only to create more explainable decision models. It also 
aims at supporting domain experts who want to use a more familiar method (which usually has lower accuracy perfor-
mances), to deal with the lack of lot of training data, or with limited computational resources, such as in the case of edge 
computing. Different to our approach, they assume to have a white-box access to the layers of a complex network model, 
whereas we treat the black-box as an oracle.
The authors in [4] propose a model extraction technique for interpreting the reasoning process performed by black-box 
models, in particular, random forests, and neural networks. The technique generates an interpretable approximation of the 
original model, in the form of a decision tree. To avoid over?tting, they use active learning to sample a large number of 
training points, and compute the corresponding labels using the complex model. Our approach is similar since Trepan also 
uses new sampled data during the extraction of the decision tree. The main motivation behind this approach is to extract 
global explanations to debug issues with random forests and neural networks – e.g., assessing the dependence on prejudiced 
features and determining why certain models perform worse –, or to understand the high-level structure of control policy 
learned using reinforcement learning. In the case of classi?cation, they compare the performance of extracted trees with
8. Conclusion and future works
In this paper, we proposed Trepan Reloaded, to improve human understandability of decision trees. It is an extension 
of Trepan, an algorithm that extracts global post-hoc explanations of black-box models in the form of decision trees. Our 
algorithm takes into account ontologies in the extraction of decision trees from black-box classi?ers. Our approach is model-
agnostic and can be applied to explain any black-box classi?ers.
We showed how the use of ontologies improves the understanding of the extracted trees by actual users. We mea-
sured the understanding through a rigorous experimental evaluation through time and accuracy of human responses as well 
as reported user con?dence and understandability. All our measures indicate that trees extracted by Trepan Reloaded are
Extensions of previous work
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ?nancial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to in?uence the work reported in this paper.
AppendixA. Supplementary material
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2021.103471.
