Title:
Isolation and characterization of human salivary gland cells for stem cell
transplantation to reduce radiation-induced hyposalivation
Abstract:
Background: Recently, we showed that transplantation of 100–300 c-Kit+ stem cells isolated from cul-
tured salispheres ameliorates radiation-damage in murine salivary glands. The aim of this study is to
optimize and translate these ?ndings from mice to man.
Methods: Mouse and human non-malignant parotid and submandibular salivary gland tissue was col-
lected and enzymatically digested. The remaining cell suspension was cultured according to our sali-
sphere culture method optimized for murine salispheres. Salisphere cells were tested using 3D matrix
culturing fortheirinvitrostem cell characteristics suchasthe potential to differentiate into tissuespeci?c
cell types. Several potential mouse and human salivary gland stem cells were selected using FACS.
Results: In human salivary gland, c-Kit+ cells were only detected in excretory ducts as shown previously
in mice. From bothhuman parotid and submandibulargland cell suspensionssalispheres couldbe grown,
which when placed in 3D culture developed ductal structures and mucin-expressing acinar-like cells.
Moreover, cells dispersed from primary salispheres were able to form secondary spheres in matrigel, a
procedure that could be repeated for at least seven passages. Approximately 3000 c-Kit+ cells could be
isolated from primary human salispheres per biopsy.
Conclusion: Human salivary glands contain a similar ‘putative’ stem cell population as rodents, express-
ing c-kit and capable of in vitro differentiation and self-renewal. In the future, these cells may have the
potential to reduce radiotherapy-induced salivary gland dysfunction in patients.
 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. Radiotherapy and Oncology 92 (2009) 466–471
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Materials and methods
 Animals
 Salivary gland irradiation
 Isolation of salivary gland cells
 Immunohistochemical processing
 Flow cytometric analysis and cell puri?cation
 Self-renewal assay
 Statistical analysis
 Results
 Discussion
 Acknowledgements


Text:
----------------------
Radiotherapy of head and neck tumors commonly induces
hyposalivation which in most cases is an irreversible side effect
resulting in complaints such as xerostomia (the subjective sensa-
tion of a dry mouth). Secondary to this, most patients develop
problems such as an increased susceptibility to oral infections
and dental caries, impeded swallowing and speech, and nocturnal
oral discomfort which have a major detrimental impact on health-
related quality of life of these patients [18,19]. Even with the most
advanced radiation techniques, such as Intensity-Modulated Radi-
ation Therapy (IMRT), still approximately 40% of these patients de-
velop hyposalivation and consequential life-long complaints [17].
To date, still no satisfactory clinical management of xerostomia
exists.
Radiation-induced sterilization of the primitive glandular stem
cells which prevents the replenishment of saliva-producing cells
seems to be the main cause for irreversible late hyposalivation
[4]. Transplantation of salivary gland stem cells potentially offers
a therapy to rescue irradiated salivary glands. For many tissues
experimental forms of stem cell transplantation have been shown
to result in improvement of tissue function, such as that for bone
marrow, skin [2,12], mammary gland [13,15], eye [14], kidney
[4], brain [10], and heart [1]. However, only hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation and epithelial stem cell-based treatments for
skin burns and corneal disorders are routinely applied clinically.
The ?rst attempt to isolate and transplant rat salivary gland
stem/progenitor cells was described in 2004, but failed to show
formation of saliva-producing acinar cells or functional improve-
ment [16]. Later, stem cells that were selected using the stem cell
markers Sca-1, c-Kit or a6+b1+integrin cells from, respectively,
mouse [5,11] and rat [6] glands were shown to contribute to tissue
regeneration when transplanted via the portal vein into partially
hepatectomized animals. The ?rst success in developing an
in vitro stem cell assay based on colony forming units was per-
formed in 2006 when Kishi and colleagues developed a clonal col-
ony assay for salivary gland cells [6]. However, due to the lack of
in vivo functional assessment, these as such determined colony
forming cells could not be de?ned as stem cells [6]. Recently, how-
ever, in a series of studies [3,7,9], we showed that salivary glands
do contain cells that when stimulated appropriately have the
capacity to regenerate damaged tissue after irradiation. Moreover,
we developed a culture and isolation procedure to obtain a c-Kit+
cell population from mice submandibular glands that contain stem
cells which when transplanted in irradiated salivary gland, promi-
nently restored function and morphology [8].
The aim of this study was to expand our ?ndings to human sal-
ivary glands for future development of clinical application. Since
this therapy might be applicable to older patients, we also investi-
gated the relationship between age and the number of salivary
gland stem cells.
Materials and methods
Animals
Female C57BL/6 mice, 2–3 months of age, were purchased from
Harlan (Horst, Netherlands). Salivary glands of 24–26 months old
mice were kindly provided by Dr. BradDykstra (Department of Cell
Biology, section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical Center Gron-
ingen, the Netherlands). The mice were kept under clean conven-
tional conditions, and fed ad libitum with food pellets (RMH-B,
Hope Farms B.V., Woerden, The Netherlands) and acidi?ed tap
water (pH 2.8). All experiments were approved by the Ethical Com-
mittee on animal testing of the University of Groningen.
Salivary gland irradiation
Salivary glands were locally irradiated with a single dose of
15 Gy of X-rays (Philips CMG 41 X, 200 kV, 10 mA, 5 Gy/min). Mice
were protected from off-target radiation by a 3 mm lead shield.
15 Gy is a dose known to induce suf?cient damage without com-
promising the general health of the animals. Four days post-irradi-
ation, mice were sacri?ced and glands were collected for further
investigation.
Irradiated human salivary gland tissue was obtained from a pa-
tient (after informed consent) with a squamous cell carcinoma of
the oral cavity in whom a neck dissection procedure was per-
formed. This patient was operated and irradiated 15 years ago for
an oropharyngeal tumor T4N1M0.
Isolation of salivary gland cells
Salispheres were obtained as previously published [8]. In short,
mice were euthanized immediately after blood removal (via car-
diac puncture) under full anesthesia (N2O/O2/iso?urane). Subman-
dibular glands were dissected carefully, avoiding contamination
from other tissues. A cell suspension was prepared by mincing
and enzymatical dissociation with collagenase type II (0.025%),
hyaluronidase (0.04%) and CaCl2 (6.25 mM) at 37 C for 40 min
with gentle mechanical movement. After an additional 40 min of
fresh enzyme digestion, thetissuecell suspension was ?ltered with
a 100 lm and a 50 lm mesh using a 25G needle, and plated in non-
coated 12-well plates at 400,000 cells per well. Per gland, between
2 and 4.6  106 cells were isolated. The culture medium consisted
of DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA; 11320–074), penicillin,
streptomycin, glutamax, EGF (20 ng/mL), FGF-2 (20 ng/mL), N-2
(serum-free supplement for culturing neural cells) (1/100), insulin
(10 lg/mL) and dexamethasone (1 lM)further depicted as salivary
gland medium (SGM). Fresh medium was added every three days.
All growth factors were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO), except for N-2 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
Human parotid and submandibular salivary glands were ob-
tained frompatients (after informed consent) with a squamouscell
carcinoma of the oral cavity in whom a neck dissection procedure
was performed. None of the patients had received any other cancer
treatment before surgicalprocedure. Cultureconditions for the for-
mation of human salispheres were similar to those for the mouse.
For differentiation experiments three day-old spheres were
mixed with Collagen type I (BD 3.68 mg/mL) and cultured for
twenty additional days until branches and acinar-like outgrowth
could be visualized. Mucin and mucopolysaccharide containing
acinar cells were detected by Periodic Acid Schiff’s base (PAS).
Immunohistochemical processing
After extirpation, the submandibular glands or cultured cells
were incubated for 30 h at 4 C in 4% buffered formaldehyde. Fol-
lowing dehydration, the tissue was embedded in paraf?n. Floating
spheres were incubated in 4% buffered formaldehyde at 4 C,
washed and resuspended in Histogel (Richard-Allan Scienti?c, Kal-
amazoo, MI;HG-4000–012), after dehydration the cells were
embedded in paraf?n. Five-lm sections were dewaxed and labeled
with a polyclonal rabbit anti-human c-Kit antibody (Cat. No.
A4502; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). Visualization was accomplished
by adding speci?c secondary ?uorescent antibodies (Jackson
ImmunoresearchEurope, Suffolk, UK). Nuclei werevisualized using
4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Control sections without pri-
mary antibodies were all negative. Cell morphology was visualized
by routine histological techniques using hematoxylin-eosin
staining.
Flow cytometric analysis and cell puri?cation
Cultured cells were dissociated by 0.05% trypsin–EDTA (Gibco,
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA;25300) with mechanical use of 26G nee-
dles. Incubation with APC-conjugated anti-human C-Kit antibody
(BD Biosciences Pharmingen-550412) was performed at 4 C for
20 min, followed by a washing step in PBS containing 0.2% BSA. Fi-
nally, Propidium Iodide (PI, 1 lg/ml) was added to the cells before
analysis using a FACS Calibur Flow Cytometer (BD) with a least
100,000eventsfor eachmeasurement. Data wereanalyzedbyFlow-
Josoftware (Tree Star,Ashland,OR).Gatesforviable(PI-negative) C-
Kit+cellswere setby using iso-typecontrols(BDBiosciences Pharm-
ingen) for APC. From 7 patients c-Kit cells were selected.
Self-renewal assay
After 3 days of culture, cells were dissociated with 0.05% tryp-
sin–EDTA and counted using a hemocytometer and suspended in
growth factor-reduced BD Matrigel Matrix (BD Biosciences) with
SGM in a 3:2 ratio (a total volume of 125 ll) with a total number
of 10,000 cells. Samples were plated in a 12-well plate and allowed
to solidify at 37C for 20 min, before 1 ml SGM was added. Med-
ium was replenished every 3 days. Ten days after plating, spheres
were counted.
To passage spheres, medium was aspirated off, and Matrigel
GFR was digested by incubation with 1 ml dispase solution (Gibco,
Invitrogen 1 mg/mL, dissolved in SGM) for 1 h at 37C. Digested
cultures were collected, pelleted, resuspended, and incubated in
1ml type 1 collagenase (Gibco, Invitrogen 190 units/mL) for
45 min at 37 C. Cells were then pelleted, resuspended, and incu-
bated in 0.05% trypsin–EDTA for 10 min at 37 C, passed through
a 26G needle and a 50 lm mesh-?lter. Finally, cells were counted
by hemocytometer and replated.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS (version 15) soft-
ware computer program using a Mann–Whitney test. Statistical
signi?cance was de?ned as P < 0.05. Numbers represent aver-
age± SEM, unless otherwise speci?ed.
Results
The successful transplantation of a murine c-kit+ salivary gland
stem cell containing cell population that restored the function of
irradiated glands [8], warrants translation of theresults to humans.
The present study was performed to compare some basics in radi-
ation response and stem cell characteristics between human and
mouse salivary glands. The success of the mouse salivary gland
stem cell transplantation is partly due to the typical response of
the tissue to radiation with disappearing acinar cells but with a
ductal compartment remaining largely intact. Since, the stem cells
of the salivary gland reside in the ducts [8], they provide the envi-
ronment for engraftment of the transplanted cells. Therefore, we
?rst studied the histopathology of irradiated human salivary gland.
Normal human salivary parenchyma comprises of acini, which
similar to mice are composed of triangle-shaped saliva-producing
acinar cells, and a branchy duct system (Fig. 1A, C, and E). After
radiotherapy, acinar cells are replaced by ?brotic tissue but similar
to mice still some ductal tissue remains (Fig. 1B, D, and F), which
may allow for the engraftment of stem cells in patients.
Next, we investigated the presence of salivary gland stem cells
in human salivary gland, using the same method of culturing sali-
spheres as in our mice studies [8]. Indeed, using this method, we
were able to grow human salispheres, which usually appeared
2 days after isolation and culturing. In general, the appearance of
the salisphereswas very similar tothat of the spheres derived from
mouse tissue (Fig. 2). To show that human salispheres contain cells
that are able to differentiate in saliva-producing cells, the dis-
persed salispheres were placed in collagen type I after 3 days of
?oating culture. Human salispheres were able to form spheres in
3D collagen type I (Fig. 3), which gradually transformed into duct-
and acinar-like structures. Fig. 3A–E shows the gradual differenti-
ation process, indicated by branching of duct-like cells and forma-
tion of acinar-like structures. The appearance of PAS (to detect
mucins) and amylase-positive cells (Fig. 3K and L) in the sali-
spheres indicates functional differentiation of cells in the spheres.
The similarities with mouse salisphere differentiation are striking
(Fig. 3 F–J, M, and N).
To show the self-renewal potential ofsalispherecells, they were
dissociated after 2 days of ?oating culture and a dispersed cell sus-
pension was plated into matrigel. New salispheres were formed in
10 days (Fig. 4A–F). These spheres were collected and dispersed
into a cell suspension which was replated in matrigel to form sec-
ondary (tertiary etc.) spheres. This procedure could be repeated at
least seven times, without apparent loss of replating ef?ciency.
This assay reveals long-term self-renewal ability in vitro to suggest
the presence of a stem cell population in human salispheres.
Recently, we showed that especially c-Kit+ cell isolated from 3-
day-old spheres cultured from mouse salivary glands contained
cells that were able to transdifferentiate in all salivary gland cell
types, to regenerate irradiated glands, and to self-renew in vivo
[8]. Therefore, we investigated human salivary glands for the pres-
ence of c-Kit+ cells. Using immuno-?uorescentstaining,normalhu-
man salivary gland clearly showed c-Kit+ cells in excretory ducts of
both submandibular and parotid glands (Fig. 5A and B, respec-
tively). This is in agreement with our ?ndings in mice [8], where
c-Kit+ was found to be con?ned to these type of ducts. Next, we
tested if the cultured human salispheres contained c-Kit+ cells.
Hereto, we dispersed 3-day-old human salispheres into single
cells and analyzed them using ?ow cytometry. Indeed, a clear
population of c-Kit+ cells (less than 1%) could be observed (Fig. 5C),
albeit in slightly lower frequencies than in mouse salispheres [8].
The salispherescultured from mouse glands were obtained from
rather young (2–3 months) animals. However, patients that are
treated for head and neck cancer are often relatively much older
and potentially may have different numbers of stem cells. Since
we showed that the number of salispheres that can be grown from
mouse salivary glands represent the number of stem cells present
[9], we testedfor a possible relationship between age and the num-
ber of salivarygland stem cells.To this end,we quantitatively com-
pared thesalispherecultureofold miceand young mice.Salispheres
were cultured from 10 old mice and the number of salispheresthat
couldbe grownwas comparedtoyoungmice.After3 days of cultur-
ing, salisphereswerecountedandsubsequently dispersedinto a cell
suspension, put into matrigel and cultured for another 10 days. As
such wewereabletomeasurethreedifferentvariables:(1)thenum-
ber of cells after isolation, (2)the number ofcells derivedfrom sali-
spheres after 3 days of culturing and (3) the number of secondary
spheres formed after passaging in matrigel. The result showed that
there was no signi?cant difference (P > 0.05) between the number
of cells that could be isolated from young or old mouse (Fig. 6A).
However,primary salispheres from oldermice contain signi?cantly
less cells than primary salispheres from young mice (P < 0.01,
Fig. 6B). Moreover, these cells were less capable to grow spheres in
matrigel in the secondary salisphere culture (Fig. 6C).
Discussion
Recently, we discovered a population of c-Kit-expressing cellsin
mice with remarkable capability to restore salivary glands dam-
aged by radiation [8]. Salispheres cultured from rodent subman-
dibular glands contained cells that expressed many stem cell
markers (e.g., Sca-1, c-Kit, Musashi-1) and were able to differenti-
ate into all salivary gland lineages. These cells were also able to
self-renew in vivo [8]. After stem cell enrichment by ?ow cytomet-
ric selection using c-Kit as a single marker, as few as 100 c-Kit+
cells were able to completely restore salivary gland function and
morphology 3 months after transplantation. This study was the
?rst evidence for the potential use of stem cell transplantation to
functionally rescue salivary gland damaged by irradiation.
In this study, we investigated the presence and in vitro potential
of human salivary gland stem cells. We determined the character-
istics of human salivary gland for the following aspects: morphol-
ogy and pathology, salisphere formation, in vitro differentiation,
self-renewal ability and the presence of c-Kit stem cell marker.
Although human and mouse salivary glands are not exactly the
same, the tissue architecture after irradiation looks remarkably
similar. In both species, the ductal compartment necessary for
stem cell engraftment largely remains intact. Moreover, salisphere
formation of human salivary gland cells was very similar to mice.
In addition, human salispheres could form duct and acinar-like
cells and were able to self-renew for at least seven passages in cul-
ture. These results indicate that human salispheres do contain cells
with stem cell-like properties. The potential existence of stem cells
that may be used for transplantation purposes is further substanti-
ated by the location of c-Kit+ cells in the excretory ducts of both
human submandibular and parotid glands. Furthermore, these
cells could be isolated from human salispheres in substantial num-
bers, albeit in lower percentages than from rodent salispheres. This
may be due toa lower stem cell number in older people such asthe
patients with head and neck cancer used in this study. Our ?nding
that older mice may have reduced numbers of cells capable to form
salispheres in ?oating culture is in agreement with this.
Therefore, we conclude that it may very well be possible to de-
velop human adult stem cell therapy to restore the function of irra-
diated salivary glands in patients. However, before we can proceed
a number of problems still have to be addressed. For instance, does
the human c-Kit+ cell population contain cells that have in vivo
regeneration ability? And, can we get suf?cient and potent enough
stem cells to establish long term regeneration of salivary glands or
do we have to expand human salivary gland stem cells in vitro be-
fore transplantation? Recently, we have shown that in vivo expan-
sion of salivary gland stem cells is attempted [9] and it may thus
also be possible in vitro.
Human and mouse salivary glands contain a similar ‘putative’
stem cell population, which might have potential to reduce radio-
therapy-induced salivary gland dysfunction in the future.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. B. Dykstra (Department of Cell Biol-
ogy, section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical Center Gronin-
gen, the Netherlands) for providing us with the opportunity to
collect salivary glands from aged mice and for discussion of the
results.
