Title:
Journal of Advanced Research

Abstract:
Background: Elderly population has been progressively rising in the world, thus the demand for anti-
aging heath products to assure longevity as well as to ameliorate age-related complications is also on
the rise. Among various anti-aging health products, nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) has been gain-
ing attentions of the consumers and the scienti?c community.
Aim of review: This article intends to provide an overview on the current knowledge on promises and
safety concerns of NMN as an anti-aging health product.
Key scienti?c concepts ofreview: Nicotinamide adeninedinucleotide (NAD+)levelsin thebody deplete with
aging and it is associated with downregulation of energy production in mitochondria, oxidative stress,
DNA damage, cognitive impairment and in?ammatory conditions. However, NMN, as the precursor of
NAD+, can slow down this process by elevating NAD+levels in the body. A number of in vivo studies have
indicated af?rmative results of therapeutic effects for various age-induced complications with NMN sup-
plementation. One preclinical and one clinical study have been conducted to investigate the safety con-
cerns of NMN administration while a few more human clinical trials are being conducted. As there is a

----------------------
Subtitles:

 Introduction
 What is nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN)?
 Phosphate group
 Mechanism underlying the anti-aging activity of NMN
 Promises and ef?cacy as an anti-aging health product
 supplementation
 BST1
 Safety concerns and challenges
 Conclusions
 Compliance with Ethics Requirements
 Declaration of Competing Interest


Text:
----------------------
Introduction
The successful control of communicable diseases in the 20th
century led to a sharp rise in the mean life expectancy of many
countries. In 2019, number of persons, aged 65 or over was 702.9
million in the world and it is projected to be 1548.9 million by
2050 [1]. Percentage of global population aged 65 years or over
in 2019 and future projections according to the medium-variant
projection is illustrated in Fig. 1.Along with increasing elderly pop-
ulation, the prevalence of age-related diseases such as atheroscle-
rosis, hypertension, osteoarthritis, neurodegenerative diseases
including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, diabetes mellitus
and cancers has gone up leading to heavy global socioeconomic
and medical burden [2].
Therefore, age management medical practices have been mush-
rooming in the world for recommending nutritional supplements,
various drugs, exercise programs, hormone therapies and other
treatments to mitigate the effect of aging. Consequently, the con-
sumer demand and the global market value for anti-aging health
products are on the rise [3]. Excessive demand of consumers and
high pro?t margin for manufacturers are the major driving force
behind the release of anti-aging health products without adequate
safety testing [4]. Thus, careful comprehensive and stepwise scien-
ti?c preclinical and clinical investigations are crucial to be
conducted.
Among various anti-aging health products, nicotinamide
mononucleotide (NMN) has been gaining an increasing attention
as a promising anti-aging product. The mitochondrial decay, which
is responsible for aging, can be reversed by the increased levels of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) in the body. NMN is a
precursor of NAD+ that acts as an intermediate in NAD+ biosynthe-
sis, while dietary supplements of NMN are found to increase the
NAD+ levels in the body [5]. NMN is a bioactive nucleotide formed
by the reaction between a nucleoside comprising nicotinamide and
ribose and a phosphate group [6]. It naturally presents in a variety
of plant and animal food sources. Furthermore, several studies
have been carried out to investigate the potential of biotechnolog-
ical production and purifying NMN from bacterial and yeasts [7].
Other than anti-aging potential of NMN, a wide range of phar-
macological activities have been identi?ed in a number of in vivo
studies. The link between NMN and the incidence of Alzheimer’s
disease, obesity and associated complications, cerebral and cardiac
ischemia, and age- and diet-induced type 2 diabetes has been
studied extensively [8]. Though, previous attention of scienti?c
community has been paid on NMN only as an intermediate in
What is nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN)?
Nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) exists as a and b anome-
ric forms while it is identi?ed as nicotinamide ribotide,
nicotinamide-1-ium-1-b-D-ribofuranoside 50-phosphate, b-
nicotinamide ribose monophosphate and 3-carbamoyl-1-[5-O-
(hydroxyphosphinato)-b-D-ribofuranosyl] pyridinium, among
others [9]. The b form is the active anomer and NMN is naturally
structured as a result of a reaction, which catalysed by nicoti-
namide phosphoribosyltransferase enzyme, between a phosphate
group and a nucleoside comprising nicotinamide (an amide form
of vitamin B3) and ribose [10]. NMN is a bioactive nucleotide with
a pyridinebase and its molecular weight is 334.22 g/mol. It is fairly
acidic and water-soluble compound. The solubility has been
reported to be 1.8 mg/mL [11] (Fig. 2).
NMN is mainly located in the nucleus, mitochondria and cyto-
plasm, whereas in the human body, it can be found in placenta tis-
sue and body ?uids such as blood and urine [9]. It is naturally
found in a variety of fruits and vegetables including immature soy-
bean pods, cabbage, cucumber, broccoli, tomato, mushroom and
Phosphate group
Mechanism underlying the anti-aging activity of NMN
There are three different biosynthesis pathways to produce
NAD+ in mammalian cells including de novo synthesis from trypto-
phan, salvage and Preiss-Handler pathways. Among these three
pathways, NMN is an intermediate by-product in salvage pathway,
and it is involved in NAD+ biosynthesis through salvage and Preiss-
Handler pathways as illustrated in Fig. 3 [15]. The salvage pathway
is the most ef?cient and the main route for the NAD+ biosynthesis,
in which nicotinamide and 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate are
converted to NMN with the enzyme action of NAMPT followed by
conjugation to ATP and conversion to NAD by NMNAT [21]. Fur-
thermore, NAD+ consuming enzymes are responsible for degrada-
tion of NAD+ and consequent formation of nicotinamide as a by-
product [13]. In the Preiss-Handler pathway, initially, nicotinic acid
is converted to nicotinic acid mononucleotide (NAMN) by nicotinic
acid phosphoribosyl-transferase enzyme (NAPRT) activity followed
by biosynthesis of nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide (NAAD+)
from NAMN using nicotinamide/nicotinic acid mononucleotide
adenylyltransferase (NMNAT 1/2/3). Subsequently, NAAD+ is trans-
formed to NAD+ by NAD+ synthetase (NADS) using ATP and ammo-
nia [22].
Chronic in?ammation and oxidative stress, which come along
with aging, are the causes for reduction and inhibition of
NAMPT-mediated NAD+ biosynthesis [23]. The depletion of NAD+
contents along with aging, which particularly of nuclear origin, is
associated with interruption of mitochondrial regulation of PCG-
1a/b-independent pathway of oxidative-phosphorylation as well,
causing pseudohypoxia. This incident can be overturned by raising
the NAD+ content [24].
Apart from reducing the functions of mitochondria, biological
changes such as cognitive impairments, DNA damage and sirtulin
gene inactivation, are brought about by aging which can be evaded
by enhancing NAD+ count in the body [24]. Apart from NMN sup-
plementation, NAD+ levels in the body can be increased as a
response to conditions related to lower energy intake [25], calorie
restriction, fasting, lack of glucose content in the body and exer-
cise. Nevertheless, NAD+ levels decrease as a consequence of intake
of high-fat diets and aging [26].
Promises and ef?cacy as an anti-aging health product
Many studies have been carried out to investigate the promises
and ef?cacy of NMN as an anti-aging health product for managing
and regulating aging and age-associated complications and
diseases using cell culture, animal models and human clinical
supplementation
investigations. In vivo studies, which have been carried out to
investigate anti-aging therapeutic effects of NMN administration,
are summarised in Table 1, including animal models, given NMN
dose, duration and observed effects. According to Yoshino et al.
[23], during the aging process, NAMPT and NAD+ levels signi?-
cantly decrease in various organs and NMN administration could
enhance NAD+ levels (from 500 to 1550 pmol/mg-tissue), insulin
secretion, insulin sensitivity and lipid pro?le in age-induced type
2 diabetic mice. Administration of NMN also can restore gene
expression linked to circadian rhythm, in?ammatory response
and oxidative stress, and improve hepatic insulin sensitivity, par-
tially by SIRT1 activation.
De Picciotto et al. [29] found that NMN supplementation was
capable of restoring NAD+ levels (by threefold), vascular SIRT1
activity, maximum carotid artery endothelium-dependent dilation,
and nitric oxide-mediated carotid artery endothelium-dependent
dilation in mice. Kawamura et al. [30] have reported that NMN
retained in animals for longer period than nicotinamide. NMN
resulted in a higher yield of NAD+ (80 nmol/g of liver tissue) in sal-
vage biosynthesis pathway activating higher response of SIRT1
than nicotinamide.
Mills et al. [10] found that devoid of any apparent deleterious
effect or toxicity, NMN effectively suppressed aging-induced body
weight gain and ameliorated eye dysfunction in mice. It main-
tained healthy plasma lipid pro?le, insulin sensitivity, physical
activity, energy metabolism and other physiopathologies. Addi-
tionally, NMN supplementation averted alterations in age-
BST1
associated gene expression in main metabolic organs, while
enhancing mito-nuclear protein imbalance and mitochondrial
oxidative metabolism in skeletal muscles. Guan et al. [31] elabo-
rated that NMN supplementation restored reduced contents of
renal protective molecule, SIRT1 and its cofactor, NAD+. The height-
ened NAD+ and SIRT1 levels in kidneys of aged mice protected aged
kidneys from both ischemia–reperfusion- and cisplatin-induced
acute kidney injuries.
As explained by Li et al. [32], nudix homology domains (NHDs)
are binding domains of NAD+ and through binding tothem, NAD+ is
able to regulate protein–protein interactions. The modulation of
these interactions may lead to protecting the human body from
aging, radiation and cancer.PARP1 is a critical protein thatinvolves
in DNA repairing. The inhibition of PARP1 is prevented by binding
of NAD+ to the NDH domain of DBC1 (deleted in breast cancer 1)
nuclear protein. Nevertheless, when NAD+ concentration is
reduced with the age, DBC1 is progressively bound to PARP1, lead-
ing to accumulate DNA damage. This process of DNA damage can
be reversed by restoring NAD+ levels in the body. Results of this
in vivo study showed that, NMN treatment increased hepatic
NAD+ contents, disrupted DBC1-PARP1 complex, reduced DNA
damage and defended against changes in haemoglobin and white
blood cell count including lymphocytes.
Tsubota [33] showed that NMN, as a sirtuins activating agent
had protective effects against age-related ocular diseases such as
glaucoma, dry eye and macular degeneration. As elaborated by
Das et al. [34], reduction of blood ?ow and capillary density with
aging is a main cause of morbidity and mortality, whereas NMN
as a NAD+ precursor can reverse these to a certain extent by trig-
gering sirtuin deacylases (SIRT1-7). NMN supplementation could
increase NAD levels in liver and gastrocnemius tissues by nearly
5 and 1 folds, respectively. Johnson et al. [35] observed that
invivo occurrence of age-associated cognitive and behavioural dys-
functions was induced by declined NAMPT-mediated NAD+ biosyn-
thesis causing 40% gradual decrease of NAD+ levels in the
hippocampus, predominately in CA1 region. It showed that, even
by short term supplementation of NMN, NAD+ levels could be
restored, while mitigating the age-related changes in the sensory
processing of hypersensitivity, several other aversive stimuli and
other associated behaviours, enhancing the quality of later lives.
A prospective downstream effector was identi?ed, namely,
calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase, which got
reduced in hippocampus along with age-related NAD+ drop. The
promoter activity of this effector was regulated in a SIRT1 reliant
manner, while its expression could be enhanced by NMN
supplementation.
Hosseini et al. [36] reported that in vivo intraperitoneal injec-
tion of NMN and NMN together with melatonin stimulated neuro-
protective effects and alleviated age-associated memory and
learning impairments. Furthermore, the administration of them
separately or in combination enhanced mitochondrial function
and decreased apoptosis cell count both in hippocampus and pre-
frontal cortex regions of aged rats. Kiss et al. [37] illustrated that
age-associated NAD+ decline was linked with mis-regulation of
vascular mico-RNA expression, NMN intraperitoneal treatments
resulted in anti-aging transformations mouse aorta mico-RNA
expression pro?le. It was predicted that epigenetic rejuvenation
and anti-atherogenic effects were some of regulatory conse-
quences of NMN. NMN treatment distinctively expressed mico-
RNAs in aged vessels.
The role of NMN in ?ghting against age-associated disorders,
such as skeletal aging associated with reduced osteogenesis and
increased adipogenesis by regulating mesenchymal stromal cells
(MSCs), was studied by Song et al. [38]. MSCs are non-
hematopoietic stem cells that contain regeneration capacity.
NMN supplementation led to self-renewal of MSCs along with
decreased adipogenesis and strengthened osteogenesis through
upregulating SIRT1 activity in mice. In addition, NMN has been
identi?ed as a promising and potential therapeutic agent for skele-
tal aging which is able to regulate bone-fat imbalance via SIRT1
and rejuvenation and expansion of aged MSCs.
Tarantini et al. [39] found that age-related increase of oxidative
stress and cerebromicrovascular dysfunction, which exacerbated
neurovascular coupling responses and age-related cognitive
decline, were caused by reduced NAD+ availability with aging.
NMN supplementation could restore tissue NAD levels by fold
change of 1 and overturn these processes which led to improved
cognitive performance in aged mice. Hosseini et al. [40] examined
the individual and the combined outcome of NMN preconditioning
and melatonin postconditioning on mitochondrial function and
cardioprotection in myocardialischemia/reperfusion injury of aged
Wistar rats, because ischemic heart diseases are the foremost rea-
sons for mortality and disability in elderly. This treatment amelio-
rated mitochondrial membrane potential, declined mitochondrial
ROS and oxidativestress and restored the balance between the oxi-
dised and reduced forms of NAD. The consequences of the com-
bined therapy of NMN and melatonin on these bene?cial effects
were greater than those of individual treatments.
According to Kiss et al. [41] in vivo NMN supplementation
enhanced NAD+ levels followed by promoting SIRT1 activation
and improving neurovascular functions and cognitive perfor-
mances. These protective effects caused by NMN treatments on
neurovascular function were predicted to be mediated by the
involvement of genes in anti-apoptosis, anti-in?ammatory and
mitochondrial rejuvenation pathways which are attributable to
versatile sirtuin-regulated anti-aging alterations in the neurovas-
cular gene expression.
Miao et al. [42] showed that NMN supplementation improved
the oocyte quality through restoring NAD+ levels (nearly 50%) in
mice. It increased ovulation, fertilisation capability and meiotic
competency, while promoting cytoplasmic and nuclear maturation
in order to maintain euploidy. Furthermore, NMN reinstated mito-
chondrial functions of aged oocytes to mitigate accumulation of
DNA damage and reactive oxygen species, leading to low levels
of apoptosis. This ?nding is echoed by Bertoldo et al. [43] who fur-
ther indicated that restoration of fertility in aged mice and other
bene?ts of NMN treatment could be recapitulated by the trans-
genic overexpression of SIRT2. Apart from rejuvenating oocyte
quality of aged animals, NMN supported the embryo development,
reversing the adverse consequences of elevated maternal age on
developmental milestones by increasing NAD levels in ovarian tis-
sue from nearly 200 to 300 pmol/mg. Fu and Zhang [44] conducted
an experiment for a patent application for using b-NMN in prepa-
ration of anti-aging health-care products or drugs using aged mice.
It was found that the NMN administration could extend the life
span of mice by ~29%. Aging is the most in?uential determinant
and the greatest known risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases
such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) [45].
It has been illustrated that elevation of NAD+, sirtuins, CD38, PARP
and SARM1 (sterile alpha and TIR motif containing 1) protein levels
Safety concerns and challenges
The ultimate goal of geroscience is to discover approaches to
boost natural defence mechanisms and prolong healthy lifespan
through better management of the risks posed to cells and tissues
of humans. Due to the continuous enhancement of the living stan-
dards of people, the desire of healthy longevity has become pro-
gressively stronger. Conversely, there is a possibility to achieve
the maximum life span speci?ed by the nature through decelerat-
ing the rate of aging. Using tiny molecules to slow down the aging
process and enhancing aging-associated outcomes is a ?ourishing
research area at the present [55]. Furthermore, at the present,
the number of anti-aging medicines and health products are com-
mercially available and popular among elderly consumers [56].
Along with the current concerns on aging as a natural biological
process, many researches on longevity are being conducted to
understand and manage the aging process through anti-aging
interventions, while complying with gerontological and biogeron-
tological aspects.
Fu and Zhang [44] have applied for a patent application for
using b-NMN in the preparation of healthcare products or anti-
aging drugs as a single dose of 1–500 mg/kg body weight/day of
b-NMN. The healthcare products or anti-aging drugs was in the
forms of injections, enteric-coatedpreparations, aqueoussolutions,
granules, capsules or tablets. A number of NMN anti-aging health
products havebeen produced and launched byvarious pharmaceu-
tical, nutraceutical, biotechnology and health food companies. The
quantity of NMN in available commercial products vary from 50 to
150 mg/capsule, whereas some consumers take two 150 mg cap-
sules per day [57]. Nowadays, there are NMN products, marketed
as supplements for anti-aging and longevity in the form of cap-
sules, which are very high in dose such as 500 mg. The safety
of these doses cannot be assessed since required clinical and toxi-
cological studies have not been completed yet to establish the rec-
ommended safe levels for long term administration. Nevertheless,
their safety and ef?cacy are uncertain and unreliable since most of
them have not been backed up by rigorous scienti?c preclinical
and clinical testing. This issue has been arisen as manufacturers
are hesitant to pay for research and clinical trials due to potential
lower pro?t margin, and there is no authorising agency to regulate
NMN products because it is often sold as functional food product
rather than heavily regulated therapeutic drug. Therefore, more
strict approval process has been demanded by consumer advocacy
groups requesting regulatory agencies to set standard and restric-
tions for marketing anti-aging health products, considering safety,
health and wellbeing of consumers [58]. NMN should not be con-
sidered as a panacea for the elderly, because boosting NAD levels
when not required may yield some detrimental effects. Therefore,
the dose and frequency of NMN supplementation should be care-
fully prescribed depending on the type of age-related de?ciency
and all other confronting health conditions of the people [59].
Other NAD precursors have been studied to discover the ef?cacy
for diverse age-related de?ciencies and they are used for particular
de?ciencies, only after they are proven for effectiveness and safe to
use. Therefore, the same principle should be applied to NMN as
well [60,61].
Grozio et al. [62] reported that NMN was speedily absorbed in
the small intestine by a speci?c transporter, which was encoded
by the Slc12a8 gene as demonstrated in in vitro and in vivo studies.
Even though a large number of preclinical studies have provided a
highly promising possibility for developing NMN as an evidence-
based anti-aging health product, its safety and effectiveness on
human physiology remains unclear. The toxicological and clinical
evidence to back up its utility is currently scarce. Despite this,
NMN supplements are already available in the market and consid-
erably used by consumers as anti-aging health products. Therefore,
in additionto animal models, human trails to investigate the safety
and ef?cacy of NMN should be conducted focusing on toxicological
parameters and safe metabolite levels in the human body [8].
Increased attention on potential pro-longevity effects of NAD+
precursors over the recent years has led to increased consumption
of nicotinamide either as a clinical treatment or a dietary supple-
ment, raising concerns on the safety of their long-term usage.
Nicotinamide has been found to cause adverse effects on several
organs in the human body such as kidney, liver, pancreatic b-
cells and cells in plasma and induce nausea, stomach discomfort
and headaches [63,64]. In addition, high dose of nicotinamide sup-
plementation is associated with decreased insulin sensitivity and
increased oxidative stress [64]. However, NMN supplementation
has been foundto have signi?cant recovering effectson hepatocyte
functions and liver pathologies in early-stage of ethanol toxicity,
instead of causing adverse effects to the liver [65]. It has also been
found to improve insulin sensitivity and oxidative stress in animal
models [23,29].
Although, nicotinamide supplementation induced DNA damage
and oxidative DNA damages in various tissues of the body such as
renal and hepatic tissues [66], NMN has been proven to reduce
DNA damage and accumulation of ROS [32,42]. Supplementation
of nicotinamide caused neurodegeneration of dopaminergic neu-
rons and structural brain changes and behavioural de?cits in rats
[67]. Supplementation of NMN has been demonstrated to stimu-
late neuroprotective effects and ameliorate cognitive decline and
behavioural dysfunctions [35,36]. Rolfe [68]reported that adminis-
tration of nicotinamide and niacin may cause development of PD,
whereas supplementation of NMN has been found to be a promis-
ing therapeutic remedy for PD [51].
NR is also a precursor of NAD+ and administration of NR has the
capability to elevate body NAD+ levels. According to the results of
clinical trials that have been performed to assess the safety of NR
administration, NR supplementation increased LDL cholesterol
levels in the body [69] and enhanced fatty liver conditions [70]
as adverse effects. Nevertheless, NMN administration was
observed to improve plasma lipid pro?le, ameliorating free fatty
acids, triglycerides and cholesterol levels and lower intrahepatic
triglyceride levels in mice [10]. Shi et al. [71] have shown that
excessive dose of NR generated white adipose tissue dysfunction
and heightened insulin resistance in mice. However, contradictory
results have been reported with NMN supplementation as it
reduced adiposity and enhanced insulin sensitivity [24,72].
NMN as another precursor of NAD+, has thepotential to encoun-
ter similar safety concerns and challenges as other NAD+ precur-
sors. Thus, further clinical studies on the safety and toxicology of
NMN are urgently needed. Mehmel et al. [60] argued that NR is a
more suitable NAD+ precursor as an anti-aging treatment. This
highlights the needs to study adverse effects of nicotinamide and
NMN, even though NMN appears to have considerable bene?cial
pharmacological actions in preclinical studies. Yoshino et al. [57]
conducted a clinical trial, supplementing 250 mg/day of NMN for
10 weeks to 25 prediabetes women who were overweight or obese
in order to identify effect on body composition, gene expression
pro?le, insulin signalling and insulin sensitivity and observed
potential metabolic bene?ts without any adverse effects.
A toxicological study for NR chloride has been done in a clinical
setting, and the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) was
300 mg/kg/day and the lowest observed adverse effect level was
1000 mg/kg/day [73]. No such data is available for human admin-
istration of NMN yet. However, Cros et al. [74] investigated sub-
chronic oral toxicity, acute oral toxicity, genotoxicity and
mutagenicity of high purity synthetic form of NMN (NMN-C)
using female Sprague-Dawley rats (7 weeks old). According to
the results, NOAEL of NMN-C was 1500 mg/kg/d. At an oral
administration dose of 2666 mg/kg of NMN-C, no treatment-
associated adverse effects or mortality were nor resulted.
NMN-C did not show toxic effects and appeared to be safe over
a 90-day sub-chronic period of repeated oral administration at
doses of 375, 750 and 1500 mg/kg/d.
Conze, Crespo-Barreto, and Kruger [75] determined safety of a
synthetic form of NR namely, NiagenTM using in vitro and rat toxi-
cological study, and found that it was not genotoxic. The lowest
observed adverse effect level for NiagenTM was 1000 mg/kg body
weight/day and NOAEL was 300 mg/kg body weight/day. Further-
more, NR has been examined in six clinical trials, where it has been
established that it is safe for short-term (8 days) and long-term
(6 weeks) supplementation in compliance with con?rmed oral
availability [60]. These values have not been established regarding
NMN supplementation. Furthermore, recently, NR has been
granted Generally Recognised as Safe (GRAS) status by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), which is yet to be achieved for
NMN.
Mills et al. [10] reported that in vivo long-term administration
of NMN mitigated age-associated physiological decline, effectively
without generating noticeable toxicity, deleterious side effects or
raised mortality. Tsubota [76] reported that the ?rst phase I human
clinical study (UMIN000021309) has been initiated aiming at eval-
uating the bioavailability, mechanism of action and the safety of
NMN in the human body. This has been a collaborative study
between Keio University School of Medicine in Tokyo and Wash-
ington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. Using ten healthy
volunteers, the time course of blood NMN concentration and the
safety of NMN administration were assessed, which was intended
for developing anti-aging nutraceutical. However, the research
team has been unsuccessful in detecting NMN in plasma samples.
Irie et al. [77] conducted a non-blinded clinical trial using 10
healthy men to investigate the safety of oral NMN administration
and the pharmacokinetics of nicotinamide metabolites at the Keio
University School Medicine, Japan. They found that single oral
administration of 100, 250 and 500 mg of NMN doses was well-
tolerated and safe since it did not cause any observable clinical
symptoms or changes in body temperature, oxygen saturation,
blood pressure and heart rate. In addition, signi?cant changes in
ophthalmic, ocular fundus and neurological system parameters
were not observed after NMN administration. There were no
changes in the results of laboratory analysis of urine and blood
as well as sleep quality and score before and after the NMN admin-
istration. Oral administration of NMN increased serum bilirubin
contents and decreased blood glucose, chloride and serum crea-
tinine levels, but within the normal range. NMN administration
did not increase nicotinamide in blood to the level which causes
adverse effects associated with high dose of nicotinamide. Since
the safety of single oral administration of NMN has only been con-
sidered in this study, further clinical investigations are essential to
be performed to assess the safety and ef?cacy of long-term admin-
istration of NMN. The organs and the tissue NMN levels have not
been analysed in this study, which should be considered in future
clinical studies.
As stated by Hong et al. [15], three more human clinical studies
are being carried out to evaluate the safety concerns of NMN
administration. One study is a phase II study (UMIN000030609),
which hasbeen initiated by the Keio University School of Medicine,
Japan to evaluate the safety of long-term administration of NMN,
pharmacokinetics and metabolites of NMN, and its effect on glu-
cose metabolism in healthy adults. Another study is being per-
formed to assess the effect of long-term intake of NMN on
different hormones in healthy individuals (UMIN000025739) by
the Hiroshima University, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences. The third clinical study (UMIN000036321) has been
designed to assess the consequences of oral administration of
NMN on the body composition in elderly people at the University
of Tokyo Hospital. These clinical trials are still ongoing and there
is no result published yet. Yoshino et al. [23] have also highlighted
the importance of more comprehensively assessing potential
adverse effects of NMN by conducting preclinical and clinical stud-
ies, considering different dietary conditions as well.
According to Di Stefano et al. [78], inhibitors of NMN synthesis-
ing enzyme (NAMPT), provided robust functional and morpholog-
ical protection of injured synapses and axons, regardless of
reducing NAD. But, exogenous NMN eliminated this protection
with the accumulation of NMN after nerve injury and NMNAT2
degradation advanced axon degeneration. They suggested that
the relationship between the increase of NMN and axon degenera-
tion could be a long-hypothesised toxic and deleterious factor.
Poljsak and Milisav [79] reported that both NR and NMN, as vita-
min B3 forms and NAD+ precursors were not detected to be
Conclusions
NMN is a precursor of NAD+ and an intermediate of NAD+
biosynthesis, which is achieved through three pathways. NMN is
an intermediate by-product in two of them. NAD+ levels in the
body are depleted with aging as a result of activities of NAD+ con-
suming enzymes. Depletion of NAD+ level is associated with down-
regulation of energy production in mitochondria, increasing
oxidative stress, DNA damage, cognitive impairments and in?am-
matory diseases. NMN, as the precursor of NAD+, has been seen
to likely reverse these age-related complications and slow down
the rate of aging by enhancing NAD+ levels in the body.
Many studies have been done to explore NMN’s anti-aging
effects in various cells and tissues. Most of the works have been
done in vitro or in animal models. However, published reports
about NMN’s long-term safety and clinical ef?cacy of anti-aging
effects in humans are scarce. From the above review, it can be seen
that only very few pre-clinical and clinical studies have been con-
ducted to investigate the safety of long-term administration of
NMN. A few more human clinical trials are being conducted to
evaluatethe safety concernsof NMNsupplementation and the out-
comes are yet to be available.
However, many NMN anti-aging health products are already
available in the market and manufacturers are aggressively mar-
keting the products using in vitro and in vivo results from the liter-
ature. Therefore, the ?rst priority should be to establish toxicology,
pharmacology and safety pro?les of NMN in humans, including
healthy and diseased. For NMN’s anti-aging ef?cacy, the most fea-
sible route to obtain data will probably through long-term follow-
ups of people who consume NMN regularly. Such research should
be supported by NMN manufacturers as they have the moral
responsibility to provide ef?cacy results of their products.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ?nancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in?u-
ence the work reported in this paper.
