Title:
Future Generation Computer Systems

Abstract:
The openness of network data makes it vulnerable to hackers, viruses and other attacks, which
seriously threatens the privacy and property security of users. In order to improve the accuracy of the
intrusion detection for network security communication, based on the traditional intrusion detection
system, combining with the deep learning theory and shortcomings, this paper proposed an intrusion
detection system for network security communication based on multi-scale convolutional neural
network, and conducted the corresponding experiments on public data sets. The experimental results
perform that compared to the intrusion detection system based on Adaboost model and Recurrent
Neural Network model, the convergence speed of multi-scale convolutional neural network system is
faster, the average error detection rate is reduced by 4.02%, and the average accuracy is improved by
4.37%. The results prove that the intrusion detection system based on multi-scale convolution neural
network has a high detection accuracy.

----------------------
Subtitles:
 1. Introduction
 2. Related work
 3. Design of the high precision intrusion detection system for
network security communication
 4. Application effect analysis of the high precision intrusion
detection system
 5. Conclusion
 Declaration of competing interest
 Acknowledgment


Text:
----------------------
1. Introduction
The world information is gradually integrated, and data shar-
ing brings network security risks, so in order to protect people’s
information security when they work and communicate on the
Internet, some scholars have begun to study the network security
protection [1]. Among them, the intrusion detection system is
one of the widely used technical types in the market, which
can effectively prevent network intrusion, and ensure the safe
operation of the system by detecting and issuing early warning
before the attack is launched [2].
However, it is undeniable that the types of hacker network
intrusion are becoming more and more sophisticated, so that the
commonly used intrusion detection system for the network secu-
rity also began to become slow, and the accuracy is significantly
poor. To find a good solution, this paper introduces the deep
learning technique to design an intrusion detection system, and
proposes a high precision intrusion detection system based on
multi-scale convolutional neural network (MSCNN).
There are two main contributions in this paper. Firstly, the net-
work data mining technology based on deep learning is used to
extract features from unordered data to improve the accuracy of
the intrusion detection. Secondly, this paper uses MSCNN to solve
the compatibility problem between intrusion detection system
2. Related work
Wei, et al. proposed an intrusion detection system combining hi-
erarchical spatiotemporal features, which improved the accuracy
of feature set describing network traffic [7]. Datta, et al. have
proposed an effective scheme, on the premise of not affecting
the effectiveness of intrusion detection system, it shortens the
activity time of the intrusion detection system [8]. Zhang, et al.
proposed a detection model and an improved adaptive evolution
strategy of constrained covariance matrix [9].
As we know, deep learning as a very advanced technique is
being studied by a lot of scholars, and it can take some good
solutions for the intrusion detection. At present, the deep learning
technique has been widely applied to a lot of fields. Kruthiventi,
et al. proposed a fully CNN model, established a bottom-up vi-
sual attention mechanism model through explicit prediction, and
automatically learned features in a hierarchical way to predict
saliency graph in an end-to-end way [10]. CNN is used to identify
abnormal EEG samples, and it is found that the accuracy of neural
network is obviously better than some other models [11]. Ma,
et al. proposed a traffic image learning method based on CNN,
which can predict the traffic speed of large-scale and whole
network with high accuracy. In the acceptable execution time, the
average accuracy of the algorithm is significantly improved [12].
Peng, et al. introduced a module composed of coding layer and
time pyramid pool layer, and proposed a new network structure,
allowing any number of frames as network input, avoiding the
risk of losing any important frame [13]. Antipov, et al. led the
team to improve the gender and age prediction methods in the
existing demographic estimation methods based on CNN, and
designed an advanced gender recognition and age estimation
model [14]. Zhu, et al. proposed a single event recognition al-
gorithm framework for cold electron microscope images based
on deep learning, which realized the integration of automatic
particle picking, selection and verification [15]. Kawahara, et al.
proposed a neural network framework to solve this question [16].
To sum up, a lot of researches have been done on the intrusion
detection system and deep learning. However, the traditional
deep learning model has some shortcomings, such as big samples
and time cost. In order to find a good solution, this paper tried to
design a MSCNN model and apply it to the intrusion detection.
3. Design of the high precision intrusion detection system for
network security communication
f (x) = max(0, x) (2)
In Eq. (2), x is the total amount of data, and max is the
maximum value.
In order to avoid the over fitting problem of network, improve
the generalization ability of network and speed up the training
speed, this study uses Dropout strategy to connect the full con-
nection layer and softmax classifier [21]. The principle of Dropout
algorithm is to set the activation value of a neuron to 0 with
a certain probability when it propagates forward, so that some
neurons stop working, and calculate and connect the data that is
not set to 0 [22]. According to the randomly generated probability
to connect the neurons, the sparsity of the network appears, the
possibility of over fitting is reduced, and the training speed of the
n??eettwwrjloo?rrkkBiisesrgncraoeluaclutlilly(apti)medparosvfeodllo[2w3s]:.UndertheDropoutstrategy,the
(3)
The rjl vector in Eq. (3) is generated by Bernoulli function,
which will generate a vector of 0 and 1 randomly.yl is the ac-
tivation function, and y?l is the activation value after rlj vector
processing.
In feature extraction and processing of neural network, for
the training data with large distribution difference, classification
accuracy will be greatly reduced. Because the distribution of each
training set is different, if the model needs to adapt each time,
it will seriously affect the training speed of the network, so
normalization processing is required for each input data [24]. A
BN algorithm is proposed, which can be used in volume layer to
accelerate the efficiency of network learning and can be used to
optimize network training. The BN algorithm is represented as
follow1s: ?
(4)
u? in Eq. (5) represents the mean value, and the variance is
??2, and then the variance is standardized, as shown in Eq. (6).
u? in Eq. (6) represents the mean value in the sample data, ??
represents the standard deviation, and then outputs the original
value yi through linear transformation, as shown in Eq. (7).
? and ? in Eq. (7) represent training parameters, and BN
represents normalization. In the forward propagation, the output
value does not change, but changes the two training parameters
of ? and ?, and each change is recorded for subsequent operation.
In the reverse training, the chain derivation is used to calculate
the recorded training parameters, and then the learning efficiency
of the network is calculated to change the weights.
The mentioned algorithm is used to update the weight and
bias of the model. The processing method of gradient descent
lgori?thm is shown1in?q. (8?).
?wiljj(W, b) = [m
(8)
In Eq. (8), wilj represents the weights of (i, j) neurons in layer l,
blij represents the bias of (i, j) neurons in layer l, and ? represents
the training parameters of each layer for parameter regulariza-
??ion. The?f edWbialj?ckl+1e)rr·ofr(ziisl)expressed as:
the historical behavior, specific behavior pattern and other be-
haviors of monitoring objects as information sources. The infor-
mation is integrated and transmitted to the analysis engine. The
analysis engine detects and analyzes the input information based
on the behavior of the system and users to determine whether
there is an intrusion behavior. If the result is that there is no
intrusion, the normal data is extracted, and the security data is
returned to allow the user to operate; if the data has intrusion
behavior, the data is sent to the response component to record
the evidence and process [26].
However, the current intrusion detection technology is limited
by its complexity, resulting in most of the intrusion detection
systems still have security risks, such as the lack of defense
capability and the accuracy of detection is not optimistic [27].
This paper proposes an intelligent intrusion detection technology
combining with MSCNN, and the model learning process is shown
in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 5, the original data set is preprocessed. Firstly,
the attribute mapping of the data is carried out, the data is
digitized, and then normalized to obtain the standardized data
set. Finally, the data preprocessing is completed by converting
the data into two-dimensional data in accordance with the con-
volution neural network input format. The integrated target data
set is divided into two sub data sets, one is used as the training
data set of MSCNN model for model learning, and the weight
is adjusted by reverse fine-tuning, the other is the test data of
MSCNN model, which is used as the final test analysis to get the
final classification results.
The standardization in data preprocessing needs to first dig-
itize the symbolic features, and the operation method of dig-
itization is to use attribute mapping, such as representing the
identified protocol type attributes through computer binary cod-
ing [28]. The normalization process is to unify the numerical
processing results to (0,1) interval distribution, and normalize
them through Eq. (10).
x ? min
y = max ? min
In Eq. (10), x is the random attribute in the network, min is the
minimum numerical attribute in the network record, and max is
the maximum numerical attribute in thenetwork record. Through
the preprocessing of the network data, the data will present the
image data format and input to the convolutional neural network.
4. Application effect analysis of the high precision intrusion
detection system
With the increasing of connection probability, the classifica-
tion accuracy of MSCNN model is also increasing. When P=0.7, the
accuracy rate reaches the maximum value of 95.7%. Then, with
the increase of connection probability, the accuracy of MSCNN
model does not increase and decrease. The results show that 0.7
should be chosen as the connection probability for the probability
selection between the connection layers, which can greatly im-
prove the accuracy. By analyzing the difference of pooling in the
overlapping mode of the pooling layer, the step size is 1–10, and
the comparison (Table 1).
As can be seen from Table 1, when average pooling is used
to eliminate noise, the error rate decreases with the increase
of step size, and decreases by 5% from the highest 44%. On the
contrary, Max Polo method can also eliminate noise better, and
the error rate decreases with the increase of step size. However,
it is obvious that the error rate of Max Polo is higher than average
Polo under the same step size. The final solution shows that
the average pooling is correct, which improves the convergence
speed of the model, and increases the accuracy of the model. Fig. 7
shows the training time change of the system under the change
of input data dimension.
The training time of the system model changes with the di-
mension of the input data, and there is a positive correlation
between the two as shown in Fig. 8. And it is not difficult to
find that with the increasing dimension of input data, the growth
trend of training time is increasing, until the dimension increases
to more than 12, the accuracy gradually tends to be stable, and
gradually keeps the accuracy within the maximum range. This
means that the accuracy of the model is affected by the dimen-
sion, and with the increase of the dimension, the accuracy of the
model also continues to increase, indicating that the performance
of the model is also continuously improving.
In addition, the effect of establishing experimental analysis BN
layer is shown in Fig. 9.
The MSCNN model without BN layer increases with the in-
crease of step number, and the accuracy rate increases gradually
(Fig. 9). When the number of steps is less than 1000, the accuracy
rate rises rapidly, and then gradually slows down. When the steps
reach 4000, it will become stable and the accuracy rate will be
stable at about 98%. However, the accuracy of MSCNN model with
BN layer increases with the increase of steps. However, unlike
the model without BN, when the number of steps is less than
500, the accuracy of the model increases rapidly and the speed is
obviously higher than that without BN model. When the number
of steps reaches 2000, the accuracy rate has begun to stabilize,
keeping at about 98%. The results show that adding BN layer to
MSCNN model effectively improves the convergence speed of the
model and the learning speed of the model.
In addition, in order to verify the proposed model, it is com-
pared to some baseline methods including Recurrent Neural Net-
work (RNN) and Adaboost models as shown in Fig. 10.
The detection rate in Fig. 10 is the average detection rate of
the three algorithms for different attack types. It can be seen from
Fig. 10 that the three algorithms can well detect different attack
types, and the detection rate is above 80%. The detection rates of
Adaboost to DOS, Normal, Probe, U2R and R2L are 87.3%, 83.1%,
84.1%, 83.7% and 80.2% respectively. The detection rates of RNN to
DOS, Normal, Probe, U2R and R2L are 90.3%, 90.3%, 90.2%, 90.3%
and 90.4% respectively. By observing the detection rate of MSCNN
model, it is found that the detection rate of MSCNN model for five
For that, the short-term detection effect and long-term de-
tection effect are analyzed respectively. First, the short-term ap-
plication effect evaluation is carried out, and the average early
warning time of intrusion detection based on different algorithms
is compared, as shown in Fig. 13.
The warning time of the proposed detection system decreases
with the increase of attack speed, which indicates that the in-
trusion detection system based on MSCNN can perfectly cope
with external network attacks as shown in Fig. 13. The same
experiment is also conducted for other two baseline methods, and
the two detection models can also achieve reducing the alarm
time with the increase of attack speed. However, from the overall
situation, the early warning time of MSCNN intrusion detection
system and the other two groups of detection systems is not
different when the attack speed is low. However, as the attack
speed increases by more than 25, it is obvious that the average
early alarm time of MSCNN intrusion detection system is 0.1s
and 0.15s faster than RNN and Adaboost respectively. The results
show that MSCNN intrusion detection system after a short-term
test, its response to network intrusion is faster, early alarm is fast,
and withthe speed of network attacks, it canalso improve its own
early warning time adaptively, which is conducive to network
security protection.
And in practical application, the installation cost of the three
intrusion detection systems and the later maintenance cost of
MSCNN are slightly lower than the other two intrusion detection
systems to a certain extent, so from the overall benefit, MSCNN
has better usability. 10 IP addresses were selected as the test ob-
jects to be attacked. The number of network attacks and detection
system in these 10 IP addresses in the next 6 months is shown in
Table 2.
It can be seen from Table 2 that the 10 IP addresses are mainly
affected by the network unknown encrypted data transmission,
Web service remote SQL injection attack, SOCKS proxy access op-
eration, HTTP protocol URL field super long buffer overflow attack
and port scanner PING Sweep operates five types of attacks, in
which the network unknown encrypted data transmission is the
most frequent of all attacks, and the maximum number of attacks
is 21513. The port scanner Ping sweep is the least attack type. The
most attack is 1622 and the lowest is 768. It shows that under
the support of intrusion detection system based on multi-scale
convolutional neural network, the number of attacks of each IP is
well detected. And it further shows that the intrusion detection
system can achieve good results in practical application, and also
verifies the effectiveness and feasibility of the research content.
5. Conclusion
In view of the defects of the network intrusion detection
system in the market, a high-precision intrusion detection tech-
nology based on MSCNN is proposed. The performance of the
network model and the effect of the detection system in the
practical application are analyzed and discussed. MSCNN is a kind
of deep learning method to realize high-precision recognition,
and it is applied to the network security intrusion detection
system. After the final performance analysis, it is found that the
convergence rate of the network adding BN layer is significantly
faster than that without BN layer. By comparing the accuracy and
false alarm rate of different algorithms in the face of different
attack types, it is found that the detection rate of MSCNN model
is higher than that of other models when facing five attack types.
In addition, the false alarm rate of MSCNN model detection is also
obvious. In the practical application, it can be seen from the short-
term application effect that the early alarm time of the system to
network attack is better than other detection systems with the
increase of attack speed. The long-term evaluation of application
effect shows that the system can prevent and classify different
types of attacks. In conclusion, MSCNN can effectively improve
the intrusion detection, which provides a theoretical support for
network security protection. However, in the future, there are still
some rooms to improve the model to construct a better intrusion
detection system.
Declaration of competing interest
Acknowledgment
This work has been supported by the research project funded
by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(2019QY1402).
