Title:
Mechanisms of radiation-induced endothelium damage: Emerging
models and technologies
Abstract:

----------------------
Subtitles:

 Endothelial dysfunction in irradiated tissue
 Normal endothelial cell function
 Endothelial cell dysfunction in early and late radiation damage
Ionizing radiation upregulates endothelial cell mediated in?ammatory
response
 IR-induced endothelium activation increases barrier dysfunction
 Radiation exposure leads to mitochondrial dysfunction
 IR increases apoptotic cell death
 Emerging models used for studying the effects of IR on
endothelium
 In vivo animal models
 In vitro cell culture systems
 Microphysiological systems
 Organoids, spheroids, and scaffolds
 Micro?uidic systems
 Therapeutics
Lack of selective anti-in?ammatory therapeutics complicates
radioprotection
 Radioprotectors
 Radiomitigators/radiotherapeutics
 Endothelial speci?c radiomitigators/radiotherapeutics
 Emerging endothelium-based radiotherapeutics
 Con?ict of interest statements
 Appendix A. Supplementary data


Text:
----------------------
Healthy tissue may be exposed to ionizing radiation (IR) during
radiotherapy [1], nuclear accidents, or by weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) [2]. IR produces oxidative stress resulting in
acute and chronic cellular damage. The vascular endothelium,
which plays an important role in organ homeostasis, is a key target
of radiation damage.Microvascular endothelial cells (EC), in partic-
ular, are sensitive to radiation and radiation-induced alterations in
EC structureand function. Damageto the endotheliumis animpor-
tant regulator of radiation damage in both targeted radiotherapy
and whole-body irradiation resulting from exposure to WMD [3].
However, the signaling pattern in these two cases may be different
due to, for example, the differential upregulation of cytokines in
local vs. whole body irradiation. IR-induced activation of EC leads
to enhanced leukocyte-EC interactions, increased permeability,
and initiation of apoptotic pathways [4,5]. Radiation-induced
endothelial damage and its associated vascular changes often lead
to chronic lesions when organs at risk (e.g. lung, kidney, heart and
brain) are exposed to suf?ciently high doses [3], and patients with
IR-induced tissue damage may die of organ failure.
Moreover, exposure to IR can accelerate atherosclerosis
adversely affecting normal tissues resulting in coronary artery dis-
ease, peripheral vascular disease, radiation pneumonitis and ?bro-
sis, and cerebrovascular disease. This effect can be increased with
higher doses per fraction [6,7]. This is clinically relevant as con-
temporary treatments move increasingly towards hypofractiona-
tion [8,9] in treatments such as stereotactic brain and body
radiosurgery (single fraction) and radiotherapy (typically 3–5 frac-
tions) for primary and metastatic brain tumors, early-stage non-
small cell carcinoma of the lung and breast conservation irradia-
tion. The radiation target volumes for these treatments must
include the planning target volume plus a margin which includes
some surrounding normal tissue as de?ned in the ICRU reports
50 [10], 62 [11] and 83 [12]. This normal tissue can be dose limit-
ing potentially compromising the target volume or resulting in
increased short- and long-term secondary effects from EC damage.
Monitoring these vascular damages have become greatly help-
ful for diagnosis purposes. Recently, many novel methodologies
have been developed to monitor the vascular damages. Angiogra-
phy, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), computed tomogra-
phy angiography (CTA) and ultrasound are used clinically for
imaging diseases that involve endothelial dysfunction resulting
from an in?ammatory response [13]. Compared to other tech-
niques,MRA has the advantage of providing high resolution images
of the vessel wall. In addition, the recent development of targeted
micro-sized particles of iron oxide (MPIO) targeting intercellular
adhesion molecules like ICAM-1, VCAM-1, P-selectin and E-
selectin have signi?cantly improved the sensitivity and speci?city
of molecular MRA for imaging endothelial activation compared to
other techniques such as plasma biomarkers [14].
Protecting the endothelium protects tissue from radiation dam-
age [15] and therapeutics that speci?cally prevent EC dysfunction
ultimately protecttissuefromradiationinjury [4] thereby reducing
side effects of radiation therapy. Given the central role of the
endothelium in normal vascular function, a better understanding
of mechanisms of radiation-induced dysfunction is vital in devel-
oping therapeutics for radiation-induced endothelium damage [3].
Endothelial dysfunction in irradiated tissue
Normal endothelial cell function
The vascular endothelium is composed of a single layer of cells
lining all blood vessels, which acts as a semipermeable barrier reg-
ulating the delivery of nutrients, oxygen and cellular components
to local tissues and the removal of carbon dioxide and waste prod-
ucts (Fig. 1). The EC barrier regulates the transport of molecules
between vascular and tissue compartments through cell–cell junc-
tions and vesicular transport [16]. The endothelium produces sev-
eral vasoactive substances such as nitric oxide that are vital in
regulation of vascular control and growth [17]. With its secretory,
synthetic, metabolic, immunologic and surface expression func-
tions, the endothelium plays a critical role in many physiological
processes, including control of vascular tone, traf?cking of the
blood cells between vasculature and underlying tissue, regulation
of immune responses, permeability, and angiogenesis [18]. EC
show signi?cant heterogeneity in structure, function, cell morphol-
ogy, gene expression and antigen composition across organs and
species [18,19]. This heterogeneity is in part dictated by intrinsic
signals as well as the organ-speci?c microenvironment leading to
distinct differences in barrier properties and interactions with cir-
culating immune cells that result in differential sensitivities and
responses to radiation.
Endothelial cell dysfunction in early and late radiation damage
Radiation-induced endothelium injury can manifest acutely/
early or late after IR exposure. Acute/early radiation syndrome
(ARS) encompasses three types of ‘radiation sicknesses’ in bone
marrow, gastrointestinal (GI), and cardiovascular/central nervous
system (CNS) [20]. GI-ARS is attributed to the radiation sensitivity
of the microvascular EC [21] and endothelial dysfunction and
increasedin?ammatory mediators inhibit the recovery of the villus
epithelium leading to the breakdown of the epithelial barrier [3].
Moreover, ?uid and nutrient absorption across EC is reduced, and
mucosal ulcerations develop, resulting in diarrhea, nausea, abdom-
inal pain, and mucous discharge. If ulceration continues, it can lead
to bacterial translocation and systemic in?ammation [22].
Late vascular effects such as capillary collapse, thickening of
basement membrane, scarring and ?brosis may occur weeks to
months post-irradiation. Depending on the radiation dose, late
pathological syndromes may be delayed in expression, chronic in
nature, and associated with evolving pathologies within multiple
organ systems, including the bone marrow, GI tract, lung, heart,
kidney and the CNS. In the brain, up to 3 weeks after single dose
of 15–30 Gy, leukocyte–EC interactions were upregulated [23].
Although hyperpermeability to albumin was observed in the
mesentery up to 6 hours after radiation exposure [24] and inhibi-
tion of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM-1) blocked the
hyperpermeability response to radiotherapy, the increase in leuko-
cyte–EC interaction and hyperpermeability can persist for days to
weeks after radiotherapy [25]. The hyperpermeability of injured
vessels facilitates extravasation of ?brinogen into the extravascu-
lar space and ?brinogen undergoes ?brinopeptide cleavage by
thrombin, which then results in crosslinking of ?brin by enzymes
such as tissue transglutaminase [26,27]. Crosslinking of tissue
transglutaminase activates latent TGFb, which further induces tis-
sue ?brosis by promoting deposition of collagen [28].
Ionizing radiation upregulates endothelial cell mediated in?ammatory
response
IR-induced cellular damage triggers apoptosis and cell death
leading to the release of damage-associated molecular patterns
(DAMP) and activation of the systemic in?ammatory response pro-
ducing signi?cant changes in the microvascular network structure
and function [29–32]. EC acquire a pro-in?ammatory phenotype
leading to increased cytokine release (Table 1), ROS production,
and enhanced EC adhesion molecule expression resulting in
increased recruitment of immune cells of myeloid and lymphoid
origin [6,24,33–35] (Fig. 1). Increased recruitment of neutrophils,
monocytes, and macrophages, as well as Th1 and Th17 lympho-
cytes, contribute to IR-induced in?ammation [6,33,36,37]. This
inappropriate in?ux of immune cells across the vascular endothe-
lium, initiation of vascular EC damage and loss of barrier function
have been implicated in the pathogenesis of radiation injury and
organ dysfunction [38].
A key step in IR-induced organ damage is excessive adhesion to
and migration of activated leukocytes across vasculature (Supple-
mentary Data Video 1 and Video 2) and a reduction in neutrophil
in?ltration is associated with better outcomes following skin irra-
diation [4]. Neutrophil recruitment is a multi-step process, which
requires crosstalk between neutrophils and EC and includes ?ve
discrete steps: capture/attachment, rolling, ?rm arrest, spreading
and extravasation/migration and each step requires crosstalk
between leukocytes and EC [39] (Figure 2). Ultimately, arrested
neutrophils extravasate to in?amed tissues across EC regulated
by concurrent chemoattractant-dependent signals, adhesive
events and hemodynamic shear forces [39].
A number of molecules involved in the leukocyte adhesion cas-
cade are also involved in radiation-induced tissue damage. For
example, we demonstrated by intravital microscopy that adhesion
molecules (ICAM-1, E-selectin) were upregulated in irradiated tis-
sue in vivo and the resulting increased leukocyte adhesion was
modulated with administration of an anti-ICAM-1 antibody
[34,35,40]. We and others have shown that irradiation of EC
in vitro signi?cantly increased the expression of the adhesion
molecules VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 [41,42].
EC also synthesize the neutrophil agonist, platelet activating
factor (PAF) [43], which is co-expressed with P-selectin within
minutes, while it takes a few hours to co-express E-selectin with
IL-8. These co-expression pairs, in turn, upregulate integrinexpres-
sion on leukocytes. Administration of a PAF antagonist, BN52021,
blocked the upregulation of leukocyte adhesion [43].
Neutrophils activated in response to IR-induced systemic
in?ammation can release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)
[53]. NETs are composed of nuclear chromatin ?laments studded
with histones and granular proteins, such as neutrophil elastase
and myeloperoxidase. While important for bactericidal activities,
NETs can also damage EC and further upregulate the in?ammatory
response [54,55]. Ability of peripheral blood neutrophils from cer-
vical cancer patients to form NETs increased from 53.6% before
radiation therapy to 66.7% after radiation therapy [56] but the
mechanisms by which IR activates NETs and the interconnection
between NETs and radiation-induced EC damage have not been
fully delineated.
IR-induced endothelium activation increases barrier dysfunction
Damage to and/or the denudation of EC after radiation exposure
produces changes in permeability of EC. The vasculature becomes
leaky within hours post-IR but the degree to which EC of vari-
ous vessel types become permeable varies in vitro [57]. IR also
increases the permeability of the blood–brain-barrier allowing
for ionic movement, excess extravasation of in?ammatory cells,
proteins and biologic response molecules (e.g. growth factors,
cytokines) into the brain parenchyma causing brain damage
[58,59]. IR alters endothelial permeability by acting on tight and
adherens junctions [60]. Tight junctions adhesion is mediated by
the claudins family of proteins, which are connected to the
cytoskeleton by tight junctions proteins while adherens junctions
are formed by classical cadherins that are linked to the cytoskele-
ton by proteins belonging to the catenin family [61,62]. Among
these, vascular endothelial-cadherin (VE-cadherin, a substrate of
ADAM10), an important regulator of vascular integrity, which
when activated, increases EC permeability [63]. In vitro, IR acti-
vates ADAM10 and cleavage of VE-cadherin, leading to increased
human endothelial permeability to macromolecules of various
sizes in a radiation dose dependent manner [60]. Consistent with
other studies [63], we demonstrated that exposure of human EC
under shear ?ow to IR in a novel microphysiological system signif-
icantly increases permeability and decreases transendothelial elec-
trical resistance (TEER) across the endothelial barrier [41].
Radiation exposure leads to mitochondrial dysfunction
In many mammalian cells, mitochondria produce cellular
energy but mitochondrial content in EC is limited and EC ATP pro-
duction is primarily via aerobic glycolysis [64]. When HUVECs
were exposed to 5–20 Gy of IR, the mitochondrial membrane
potential decreased and mitochondrial ROS production increased
[65]. Furthermore, murine cardiac microvascular EC acquired pro-
tein expression pro?les related to mitochondrial dysfunction when
they were irradiated with 8 and 16 Gy X-rays [66]. It is hypothe-
sized that EC mitochondria functions more as important signaling
organelles [67] and the three main mitochondrial functions, Ca2+
regulation, control of cell death, and oxidative stress signaling
are disturbed following IR exposure [68]. Mitochondrial Ca2+ sig-
naling is altered by IR [69], and at IR doses high enough to over-
come cellular antioxidant responses, oxidative stress can lead to
mitochondrial dysfunction [70].
IR increases apoptotic cell death
Apoptotic cell death due to radiation exposure can be primarily
mediated by either p53 or the sphingomyelin/ceramide pathways
[6]. It’s shown that p53 is important in response to DNA damage,
which activates mitochondrial-mediated cell apoptosis [71].
Endothelialcell apoptosis at doses > 5 Gy can be induced by persis-
tent DNA damage, resulting in leading to p53 accumulation and
resulting in activation of the caspase pathway, [72] but mecha-
nisms of endothelial cytotoxicity at lower radiation doses are less
known [73]. It has been proposed that EC apoptosis after high-
dose single-fraction IR is primarily modulated by the sphin-
gomyelin ceramide pathway [74]. Sphingomyelin is a phospholipid
present in the cell membrane which is hydrolyzed by TNF activa-
tion after IR exposure. Extracellular acidic sphingomyelinase then
leads to radiation-induced, ceramide-mediated EC apoptosis [75].
A classical study has shown the requirement of the sphingomyeli-
nase encoding gene, ASMase, for mediating ceramide generation in
induction of microvascular endothelial apoptosis [21] and high
dose IR triggering of ASMase/ceramide signaling in EC has been
shown to play a major role in membrane signaling after radiation
exposure [76]. However, the precise relationship between IR dose
and EC apoptosis has not been clearly established [77].
IR also induces differential effects on microRNA (miRNA) levels
in EC. In vitro studies demonstrated that miRNAs have a role in EC
clonogenic survival and cell growth, as well as impacting EC radio-
sensitivity indicating an important role of miRNAs in the EC
response to radiation [78].
Emerging models used for studying the effects of IR on
endothelium
In vivo animal models
Although no single animal model can completely represent the
human condition, in vivo models including mouse, rat, rabbits, and
pigs have been widely used to study radiation-induced endothe-
lium damage [68]. The choice of an appropriate animal model for
a speci?c study is generally dictated by factors such as anatomy,
physiology, genetics, and immune response of the animal model
being considered. Mice show similarities to human physiological
and genome (>95%) [79] and have been used widely to study radi-
ation induced upregulation of cell adhesion molecules, leukocyte-
endothelial interaction and EC damage [34,80]. However, the
mouse may not be the optimum animal model for studying radia-
tion induced damage for multiple reasons. A major disadvantage is
their small body thickness, which does not account for the hetero-
geneity of radiation dose distribution characteristic to human
exposure [79]. Additionally, despite the phylogenic relatedness,
translating studies from mouse immune system to human disease
is complicated by many factors including size, metabolic rate,
WBCs composition, and differences in pathophysiology and drug
LD50 values that are signi?cantly different from humans [3,81].
Given the complexities inherent in the use of animal models,
several in vitro systems have been developed that use human
cell-based assays to provide a better understanding of radiation-
induced cell damage in humans.
In vitro cell culture systems
EC grown as a homogeneous 2D monolayer are traditionally
used to complement animal models. A number of these in vitro
EC models have been used to study effects of IR on activation of
the NFjB pathway [82], alterations in mitochondrial membrane
potential [65] and the effect on vascular tone [83]. The effect of
IR on EC permeability and barrier function can also be monitored
in 2D models through measurement of TEER, EC adherens junc-
tional integrity, and EC monolayer permeability [84]. Although
using primary EC can provide important insight into various phys-
iological and pathological processes, cell culture presents signi?-
cant challenges. For example, almost all primary EC have an
average life span of 5–10 serial passages in vitro, after which these
cells often stop proliferating when they form multinucleated cells
andeventually die[85]. Another drawback is the phenotypic differ-
ences between large vessel-derived EC (e.g. HUVEC) vs. EC of
microvascular origin (e.g., human dermal microvascular cells) but
also between EC derived from different organs. These mostly static
cell culture systems fail to reproduce many of the complexities of
the in vivo conditions including three-dimensional EC morphology,
cell–cell and cell-matrix interactions, and shear ?ow conditions
[86]. Nevertheless, these low cost, easy to use, and high-
throughput systems are considered standard for analysisof cellular
responses [86]. Flow-based 2D cultures offer advantages as they
have more precise spatial/temporal dynamics, sensor integration
and continuous monitoring [35,86].
Microphysiological systems
The inability of 2D monolayer cultures to recreate the appropri-
ate microenvironmentfor cell-matrix, cell–cell, cell-tissueand cell-
organism interactions has led to the development of an emerging
new class of in vitro models that better mimic the in vivo condi-
tions. These new models not only provide novel approaches for
studying radiation damage to EC but also offer a new tool for the
rapid development and screening of therapeutics. Microphysiolog-
ical systems, often synonymous with ‘‘organ-on-chip”, commonly
consist of an interconnected set of 2D and 3D cell cultures in
micro?uidic devices. These emerging organ-on-a-chip systems
can increasingly recapitulate the complex microenvironment of
different human tissues by recreating organ-speci?c geometries
and co-culturing of multiple cell types, mimicking the physiologi-
cal and pathological conditions and responses to therapeutics.
Microphysiological systems can serve as in vitro models of brain,
GI tract, lung, liver, vasculature, and skin microvasculature [87]
and are rapidly becoming the new standard tool for better under-
standing vascular biology, pharmacology and toxicology [87]. Sev-
eral microphysiological systems have been used to study the
effects of radiation on different organs and screen various thera-
peutics [41,88]. Employing both human and mouse cells, together
with omic and in silico modeling approaches, will help better pre-
dict how therapeutics developed in animal models may work in
clinical settings as well as screen potential therapeutics on patient
cells for personalized medicine [89].
Organoids, spheroids, and scaffolds
Recent advances in tissue engineering have facilitated the
development of novel 3D models for radiobiological research
including organoids, spheroids and scaffolds. Organoids consist of
a collection of organ-speci?c cell types that spatially organize to
restrict lineage commitment similar to in vivo [90]. Spheroids are
aggregated, mutually adherent population of cells with spherical
shapes [91]. Although organoids have in vivo like cellular architec-
ture and spheroids have advantages of high reproducibility [92],
they are still not widely used in studying radiation-induced EC
damage in part due to the major challenges associated with devel-
oping organoids and spheroids. A key limitation in using organoid
and/or spheroid based approaches to generate functional tissue is
that upon reaching a certain size, organoids switch from a prolifer-
ative, stem-like state to a non-proliferative, terminally differenti-
ated one and develop a necrotic core [93]. With the exception of
a few avascular tissues, any efforts at producing tissues would be
limited to a length scale of approximately 150 lm, the natural dif-
fusion limit of oxygen in tissue. However, scalable 3D microfabri-
cation technologies like layer-by-layer deposition of materials
and selective removal of materials to form tubular voids, as well
as a range of hybrid approaches utilizing sacri?cial materials
[93], allow for generation of free-form vascular structures in orga-
noids [94,95].
Scaffold/matrix-based 3D cultures (Fig. 3A) are formed by seed-
ing cells on a 3D synthetic-based matrix or by dispersing cells in a
liquid matrix followed by polymerization to mimic the tissue
microenvironment [92]. Scaffolds have high reproducibility and
allow for cocultureof other cell types but frequently have a simpli-
?ed architecture [92]. While 3D cultures are considered more
informative for studying radiation damage, they are not as easy
to propagate and standardize as monolayer cultures. These 3D
in vitro models must incorporate both the spatial organization
and differentiated function of the tissue in vivo to allow reproduc-
tion of cell–cell interactions and create the appropriate microenvi-
ronment for cellular proliferation and gene expression [96]. For
example, a 3D capillary model using human umbilical vein EC
(HUVEC) grown in a collagen gels showed more complex and per-
sistent 53BP1 DNA damage foci when exposed to high LET (linear
energy transfer) as compared to low LET [97]. However, due in part
to the complexity and lack of reproducibility of some 3D models,
more realistic in vitro assays using human cells are needed to bet-
ter mimic the in vivo microenvironment.
Micro?uidic systems
Micro?uidic systems (Fig. 3B) permit the study of complex vas-
cular and microvascular processes, such as neutrophil-EC interac-
tions and the in?ammatory response, using in vitro 3D models
that more realistically reproduce the tissue microenvironment.
For example, Gut-on-a-chip models have been used to study the
effects of gamma (c)-radiation on villus intestinal epithelium
[88]. Exposure to c-radiation increased the generation of ROS, cell
cytotoxicity, apoptosis, and led to compromised intestinal barrier
integrity. A microvasculature-on-a-chip was used to investigate
the effects of IR on HUVEC forming 3D perfusable networks mim-
icking the human microvasculature [98]. Importantly, a systematic
comparison between HUVEC cultured in this system with a tradi-
tional 2D monolayer model showed signi?cant differences upon
IR exposure, particularly at high doses that are typically used in
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) and stereotactic radio-
surgery (SRS). At high IR doses up to 25 Gy, VE-cadherin cell–cell
adherens junctions did not change signi?cantly in the 3D ?uidic
model but were signi?cantly damaged in the 2D monolayer model.
Similarly, increased apoptosis was observed in the 2D monolayer
model as compared to the 3D ?uidic model. An advantage of the
3D models is that ECs form 3D tube-like structures in these model
systems mimicking a more realistic in vivo environment and
behave quite differently than those cultured in a 2D environment
[98]. The fact that many of the in vitro studies of effects of IR has
traditionally resulted from studies conducted with clonogenic
assays in a 2D environment should give impetus to validate these
?ndings in micro?uidic systems mimicking the 3D in vivo
microenvironment.
Our group has developed a novel biomimetic micro?uidic assay
(bMFA) that facilitates real-time assessment of neutrophil rolling,
?rm arrest, spreading and migration to the extravascular tissue
in a realistic microvasculature geometry under physiologic shear
conditions in a single assay (Fig. 3 C–F). This is one of the few
in vitro systems that realistically model in vivo geometrical fea-
tures, including vascular morphology and ?ow conditions such as
converging or diverging ?ow at bifurcations of the vasculature
[41,99–101]. This integrated micro?uidic assay provides a novel
platform for investigating the EC in?ammatory response,
neutrophil-EC interaction, and EC damage in response to various
stimuli including IR (Supplementary Data, Video 3). We have used
bMFA to demonstrate that IR exposure upregulated human
neutrophil-EC interaction, increased ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 (but
not E-selectin) expression, and increased permeability under shear
?ow conditions [41].
Therapeutics
Radioprotective agents are classi?ed into three broad cate-
gories: radioprotectors, radiomitigators and radiotherapeutics.
Radioprotectors are administered prior to radiation exposure to
protect downstream injury and include molecules with thiol func-
tionalities and antioxidant properties. Radiomitigators are given
during or quickly after radiation exposure, primarily to mitigate
normal tissue toxicity, stop/alleviate the consequences of tissue
exposure to radiation and to hasten repair (Table 2). Radiothera-
peutics are given after the clinical appearance of normal tissue tox-
icity to ameliorate radiation damage and to initiate tissue
regeneration or repair [102]. Radiomitigators and radiotherapeu-
tics can also serve as radiation countermeasures during mass casu-
alty events resulting from radiation exposure.
Lack of selective anti-in?ammatory therapeutics complicates
radioprotection
While the use of Neupogen and Neulasta to treat hematopoietic
acute radiation syndrome (H-ARS) was recently approved by the
FDA, therapeutic approaches to the treatment of radiation-
induced vascular/ endothelial injury are largely supportive and
there are nospeci?cpharmacologic therapies availablethat protect
from radiation-mediated tissue damage [3]. Given the fact that
radiation damage to EC initiates and is mediated by the immune
response, radioprotection is also hampered by a lack of effective
anti-in?ammatory therapeutics. Most anti-in?ammatory thera-
peutics work primarily through immunosuppression, rather than
selective immune modulation. This lack of effective anti-
in?ammatory agents continues to complicate the treatment of
in?ammatory pathologies ranging from sepsis and COVID-19 to
radiation-induced in?ammatory response. Radiotherapies for
treatment of IR-induced endothelial damage have been primarily
focused in 3 areas, targeting EC pathways activated in response
to radiation, reconstitution of bone marrow and reduction in vas-
cular barrier permeability and vascular leak [3].
Radioprotectors
Potential radioprotectors include BAY 11-7085, an inhibitor of
NF-jB activation, has been shown to partially inhibit the effects
of c-radiation on permeability and TEER in HUVECS [103]. Geranyl-
geranylacetone (GGA), a drug used to treatpeptic ulcers and gastri-
tis, has been shown to moderate IR-induced intestinal injury and
EC dysfunction [104]. Intestinal microvessels were preserved in
GGA-treated mice thereby reducing intestinal injury. GGA plays
an important role in the promotion of angiogenic activity in dam-
aged EC via inducing VEGF/eNOS signaling and suppressing in?am-
matory cytokine expression [104].
Radiomitigators/radiotherapeutics
Pentoxifylline is a radiomitigator/radiotherapeutic used to treat
vascular disease by inhibiting platelet coagulation, enhancing red
blood cell deformability and promoting vessel blood ?ow. Pentox-
ifylline also inhibits neutrophil adhesion to EC by decreasing plate-
let coagulation via platelet activating factor (PAF). Administering
pentoxifylline and another alpha tocopherol/vitamin E to patients
undergoing radiotherapy lowered their pulmonary toxicity com-
pared to controls after six weeks [105].
Endothelial speci?c radiomitigators/radiotherapeutics
Several potential therapeutics that target IR-induced damage to
EC are currently being evaluated in in vitro cell cultures and animal
models. A novel tetrapeptide N-acetyl-Ser-Asp-Lys-Pro (Ac-SDKP)
has beenshown to localize to EC and inhibit IR-induced endothelial
ROS generation [106]. In vivo studies demonstrated that Ac-SDKP
administration was able to restore IR-induced endothelial barrier
damage by preventing EC cell loss and increasing expression of
tight junction proteins. Ac-SDKP also showed strong anti?brotic
effects that inhibited IR-induced coronary vascular ?brosis thus
preserving myocardial blood ?ow [106]. The statin, Pravastatin,
has also been shown to exert persistent anti-in?ammatory and
anti-thrombotic effects on irradiated EC and to inhibit leukocyte-
EC interaction [107]. Pravastatin also regulates thrombomodulin
(TM) expression which inhibits the leukocyte adhesion to the irra-
diated EC. Although the mechanisms of TM transcription activation
by this drug is unclear, suppression of IR-induced endothelial
interaction with leukocyte may prevent intestinal in?ammation
post-irradiation [107]. Angiotensin II (Ang II) is produced by the
endothelium in response to IR and induces the generation of the
pro?brotic cytokine TGF-b. In vitro treatment of EC with the ACE
inhibitor, Captopril, following IR was shown to reduce Ang II
expression, inhibit the NF-jB pathway, and reduce TGF-b1 expres-
sion [108].
Genetic approaches employing knockout mice have identi?ed
other EC targets to mitigate IR-induced cell damage. For example,
endothelial expression of the plasminogen activator inhibitor type
1 (PAI-1) following IR increases and plays a role in activating
endothelial apoptosis. In response to IR, PAI-1/ mice had
increased EC survival, preserved vascular density and mucosal
integrity as compared to wild type mice [109]. Mice with key
proapoptotic proteins Bak and Bax deletions in both bone marrow
EC and bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) exhibited
protection of the BM vasculature and increased survival post IR
exposure [110].
Emerging endothelium-based radiotherapeutics
To respond to the urgent need for new therapies, new classes of
novel therapeutics are being developed to speci?cally treat
endothelial dysfunction resulting from radiation exposure. For
example, the peroxisome agonist, Rosiglitazone, which is used clin-
ically to treat diabetes [111], was recently shown to preserve mito-
chondrial function after radiation exposure and to stimulate
mitochondria biogenesis in EC. When coronary EC were treated
with Rosiglitazone before IR exposure, the cells exhibited
enhanced respiratory function used for ATP production and apop-
tosis was reduced [112]. The effects of treating EC with Rosiglita-
zone after radiation exposure have not been reported, so the
ef?cacy of this therapeutic for treating victims of mass/accidental
radiation exposure remains unclear.
We identi?ed Protein Kinase C-delta (PKCd) as a critical regula-
tor of the in?ammatory response controlling leukocyte in?ltration
across endothelium and loss of barrier function. PKCd is activated
in multiple cell types in response to radiation exposure and is
involved in radiation-induced apoptosis [113]. Moreover, PKCd
overexpression enhanced radiation-induced apoptosis indicating
a critical signaling role [114]. PKCd/ mice were protected from
radiation-induced damage to the salivary gland and thymus [115].
We have shown that delivery of a speci?c PKCd-TAT peptide
inhibitor to the lung had a dramatic anti-in?ammatory and lung
protective effect in a rodent model of sepsis [116]. Similarly, we
have used our novel micro?uidic assay (bMFA) to show that PKCd
inhibition dramatically attenuates radiation-induced human EC
damage, leukocyte migration (Fig. 4A) as well as vascular EC per-
meability (Fig. 4B) and preserved integrity of irradiated EC
(Fig. 4C–E) even when administered 24 hrs post-IR [41]. Moreover,
neutrophil adhesion to irradiated EC was signi?cantly decreased
after PKCd inhibition in a shear-dependent manner. PKCd inhibi-
tion downregulated radiation-induced P-selectin, ICAM-1 and
VCAM-1overexpression [41].
In preliminary studies, treatment of whole body 7 Gy irradiated
C57BL/6J mice with the PKCd inhibitor signi?cantly delayed and
reduced mortality (Fig. 4F), supporting the hypothesis that PKCd
is activated in response to radiation and PKCd inhibition provides
a protective effect. Furthermore, administration of the PKCd-TAT
peptide inhibitor used in our study has already been shown to be
safely tolerated in Phase I/II clinical trials for treating acute
myocardial infarction [117,118].
In summary, radiation-induced EC injury in large part mediates
and regulates wider tissue damage. Ionizing radiation directly acti-
vates and damages the endothelium via increased adhesion mole-
cule expression, leukocyte-EC interactions, mitochondrial damage,
barrier permeability and apoptosis. Emerging in vivo and in vitro
models of vascular in?ammatory response are providing not only
a better understanding of mechanisms underlying the progression
of radiation-induced EC damage but also a roadmap for developing
highly speci?c radiotherapeutics for preventing and treating side
effects of radiotherapy and/or accidental radiation exposure. Novel
therapeutics that speci?cally focus on common key control points
or signaling hubs can more effectively regulate the multiple over-
lapping and redundant mechanisms that modulate the signaling
pathways regulating the vascular endothelial response to
radiation-induced damage.
Con?ict of interest statements
All authors con?rm that they have read and approved the ?nal
version of the manuscript being submitted. They also certify that
the article is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2021.02.007.
