Title:
Tracking tumor biology with radiomics: A systematic review utilizing a
radiomics quality score
Abstract:
Introduction: In this review we describe recent developments in the ?eld of radiomics along with current
relevant literature linking it to tumor biology. We furthermore explore themethodologic quality ofthese
studies with our in-house radiomics quality scoring (RQS) tool. Finally, we offer our vision on necessary
future steps for the development of stable radiomic features and their links to tumor biology. Methods:
Two authors (S.S. and H.W.) independently performed a thorough systematic literature search and out-
come extraction to identify relevant studies published in MEDLINE/PubMed (National Center for
BiotechnologyInformation,NCBI), EMBASE (Ovid) and Web ofScience(WoS). Twoauthors (S.S, H.W) sep-
arately and two authors (J.v.T and E.d.J) concordantly scored the articles for their methodology and anal-
yses according to the previously published radiomics quality score (RQS). Results: In summary, a total of
655 records wereidenti?ed till 25-09-2017 basedon the previously speci?ed searchterms, from whichn
= 236 in MEDLINE/PubMed, n = 215 in EMBASE and n =204 from Web of Science. After determining full
article availability and reading theavailablearticles, a total of n = 41studieswere includedin thesystem-
atic review. The RQS scoring resulted in some discrepancies between the reviewers, e.g. reviewer H.W
scored 4 studies 50%, reviewer S.S scored 3 studies 50% while reviewers J.v.T and E.d.J scored 1 study
50%.Up to nine studieswere givena quality score of 0%. The majority ofstudieswere scored below 50%.
Discussion: In this study, we performed a systematic literature search linking radiomics to tumor biology.
All but two studies (n = 39) revealed that radiomic features derived from ultrasound, CT, PET and/or MR
are signi?cantly associated with one or several speci?c tumor biologic substrates, from somatic mutation
status to tumor histopathologic grading and metabolism. Considerable inter-observer differences were
found with regard to RQS scoring, while important questions were raised concerning the interpretability
of the outcome of such scores.
 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. Radiotherapy and Oncology 127 (2018) 349–360 Thisis
an open accessarticleunder the CCBY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Materials and methods
 Systematic search strategy
 Study selection
 Data extraction
 Results
 Discussion
 Appendix A. Supplementary data


Text:
----------------------
Medical images are estimated to account for as much as 90 per-
cent of total stored medical data, with collections of over 30 billion
medical images currently available in the United States privatesec-
tor domain for advanced arti?cial intelligence pattern analysis [1].
Medical images such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic res-
onance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) are
obtained for nearly all oncology patients undergoing therapy. Cur-
rently, most patients will undergo multiple imaging sessions dur-
ing the course of their treatment. These digital data are
increasingly available in the standard DICOM data format, allowing
for easy and consistent analysis.
Over the past decade the endeavor to transformdigital standard
of care medical images to mineable high-dimensional data by
extracting mathematically quantitative features has been at the
forefront of imaging research. Radiomic studies may help to char-
acterize tumor biology in vivo by correlating imaging features with
ground truth pathology substrates.
Although medical images are commonly used by radiologists to
describe a pathologic substrate, features extracted in the radiomic
process are not part of radiologists’ lexica since they are generally
not visible to the naked eye. The hypothesis is that these features
provide added relevant tumor-biology related genomic, cellular
and metabolic information [2,3]. Features derived from radiomic
analysis (e.g., intensity, shape, texture, wavelet, etc.) can provide
information that is complementary to other relevant clinical infor-
mation and are therefore intended to augment currently available
clinical decision support systems (CDSS) [4–7]. The ?nal goal is to
improve personalized medical decision-making (see Fig. 1): estab-
lishing reliable models that can stratify therapy outcomes and can
be used for assessing patients’ personal trade-off between the risks
and bene?ts of different treatment options [8–10].
In this review recent developments in the ?eld of radiomics are
described, along with relevant literature linking it to tumor biol-
ogy. Metrics for internal/external validity and completeness of
the radiomic work?ow have been calculated for these studies with
our in-house developed radiomics quality score (RQS) tool [11].
Introducing this tool highlights the methodology upon which
inference was drawn with regard to the link between radiomics
and biology. General comments and recommendations for the
improvement of this tool are presented. Finally, we offer our vision
on necessary future steps for the development of stable and robust
radiomic biomarkers and their link to tumor biology.
Materials and methods
Systematic search strategy
The research question for this systematic review is described as:
‘‘What are the known studies linking radiomics to tumor biology
and what is the methodological quality of these studies?”
We conducteda comprehensive literature search to identify rel-
evant studies published in MEDLINE/PubMed (National Center for
Biotechnology Information, NCBI), EMBASE (Ovid) and Web of
Science (WoS) until 25-09-2017. We used a search string contain-
ing free-text and/or Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) search of 3
key search terms: ‘biology’, ‘neoplasms’ and ‘radiomics’ while
search terms such as ‘imaging features’ were not used as our pur-
pose was to review manuscripts using more recent, high through-
put technology. Details on the search method are shown in the
Supplementary Appendix.
Study selection
We included articles satisfying the following inclusion criteria:
(1) articles were full-text and written in English, (2) the study pop-
ulation consisted of humans or animals with acquired tissue sam-
ples or biologic biomarkers, and (3) radiomic analysis was
performed on mammography, ultrasound, CT, PET or MR images.
Duplicate ?ndings were discarded to ensure that no data overlap
occurred. Further selection was performed by applying the follow-
ing exclusion criteria: (1) studies not linking fundamental biologic
substrate (e.g., blood biomarkers) to radiomics, and (2) case-
reports, (systematic) reviews, and expert opinion papers.
Data extraction
Two authors (S.S. and H.W.) independently performed a thor-
ough systematic literature search and outcome extraction. From
the included articles, data concerning study characteristics was
extracted and tabulated (author, publication year, study popula-
tion, radiomic feature extraction, main results and conclusion)
together with measurement characteristics (i.e., method for quan-
tifying biological mechanism). Furthermore, most relevant statisti-
cal results (e.g., p-values, AUC, c-index) were extracted and
summarized. p-Values <0.05 were considered indicative of statisti-
cal signi?cance.
S.S., H.W. separately and E.d.J. and J.v.T. concordantly scoredthe
articles for their methodology according to the radiomics quality
score (RQS) [11], consisting of sixteen key components (e.g., robust
segmentation, use of standardized imaging protocols, use of valida-
tion dataset); each component was assigned a number of points
corresponding to its importance as shown in Table 1. Agreement
between the reviewers was assessed by means of a modi?ed Fleiss
kappa statistic (linear weights, 1000 iterations for the percentile
Bootstrap and for the Monte Carlo test, alpha = 0.05) in R-studio
for Windows (R version 1.0.136, Boston). Although the RQS serves
as a guideline to evaluate the radiomic work?ow presented in a
given publication for internal consistency, clinical relevance and
applicability, and reproducibility, it neither completely reveals
the methodologic quality nor does it re?ect the overall quality or
importance of the research and as such it should not replace the
reader’s scienti?c appraisal. In the context of this review it is used
as an example for a protocol that can be applied when trying to
assess the reliability of correlations, classi?ers and predictors built
using radiomics as their basis.
Results
In summary (see Fig. 2), a total of 655 records were identi?ed
until 25-09-2017 based on the previously speci?ed search terms,
from which n = 236 in MEDLINE/PubMed, n = 215 in EMBASE and
n = 204 from Web of Science. After imposing language-
restrictions and removing duplicate ?ndings, 450 articles
remained. Further screening by reading the abstracts and applying
the outlined inclusion criteria resulted in 78 potentially eligible
studies. After determining full article (open source as well as
request print) availability and reading the available articles taking
into account the exclusion criteria set out for this systematic
review, a total of 41 studies were included, while 37 articles were
eliminated. A tabulated view of the principal results, conclusion
and RQS score per component and rater for these studies is pro-
vided in Supplementary Table 1 and Fig. 3a–c. A brief summary
of the mean RQS scores between reviewers J.v.T. and E.d.J., H.W.
and S.S. and the biological correlates, and if mentioned the micro-
biologic technique, is presented in Table 2. The inter-observer
agreement with upper/lower level con?dence interval is presented
per RQS component in Fig. 4.
Although many correlations between radiomics and specimen
biology are weak, all but one study [12] reported that at least
one radiomic model was signi?cantly associated with one or sev-
eral speci?c biologic mechanisms. In total 38 studies were on clin-
ical cancer patients and three on preclinical data. Occasionally
multiple links between radiomics and biology were addressed,
e.g., histopathological grading and gene expression. For instance,
Grossmann et al. identi?ed and independently validated thirteen
radiomic-pathway modules with coherent expression patterns,
eleven of which were signi?cantly associated with overall survival,
stage, or histology [13]. By basing these clinical associations exclu-
sively on radiomic features, they could demonstrate that the asso-
ciated molecular pathways robustly matched radiomic-based
hypotheses. For example Laplace of Gaussian intensity standard
deviation, wavelet intensity variance, and wavelet texture entropy
were prognostic and associated with staging. These features were
highly enriched (pathway analysis) for immune system, p53, and
cell-cycle regulation pathways, biological processes that are widely
recognized to play key roles in lung cancer.
A total of 17 studies established a correlation between cancer
imaging features and a certain gene expression or gene mutation,
a process called radiogenomics [12–28]. Importantly, a causal rela-
tionship rather than a correlation was demonstrated between
genetic changes and image features, reported by Panth et al. [26].
In this preclinical study gene induction with doxycycline (dox+)
and irradiation translated into signi?cant changes in radiomic fea-
tures in GADD34 mouse xenografts (between the dox+ and irradi-
ation groups 8 and 4 of these features remained consistent for 40
and 80kVp, respectively).
A total of nine studies associated radiomic features with tumor
histopathological grading/malignancy prediction [29–37]. Another
15 studies explored the correlation between imaging features and
a speci?c histological substrate, e.g., hormone receptor status or
microvascular density (MVD) [37–51]. Finally, three studies found
correlations between tumor metabolism and radiomic features
[22,51,52].
The best performing classi?er achieved an AUC of 0.96 in differ-
entiating between high and low grade intraductal papillary muci-
nous neoplasms (IPMNs) (this performance was based on
internal cross-validation, rather than on an independent validation
cohort) [29]. The poorest performing classi?er, ‘tumor diameter’,
achieved an AUC of 0.56 in the prediction of EGFR mutation status
[27].
The RQS scoring resulted in some discrepancies between the
reviewers, e.g. H.W. scored 4 studies 50%, S.S. scored 3 studies
50% while J.v.T. and E.d.J. scored 1 study 50%. Up to nine studies
were given a quality score of 0%. The majority of studies were
scored below 50% due to lacking robust segmentation, external val-
idation and cut-off analyses/reporting. Nearly all studies were ret-
rospective and lacking a calibration plot. Striking was that a lack of
a prospective study design registered in a trial database accounted
for as high as 7/36 (nearly 20%) of the total RQS score. Not a single
study investigated cost-effectiveness of a potential clinically
implemented radiomic signature.
Discussion
In this study, we performed a systematic literature review of
studies addressing the interplay between radiomic features and
tumor biology. In total 39 out of 41 studies reveal that radiomic
features derived from mammography, ultrasound, CT, PET and/or
MRI are signi?cantly associated with one or several speci?c tumor
biologic substrates, from somatic mutation status to tumor
histopathological grading and tumor metabolism.
To assist with benchmarking the radiomic work?ow for report-
ing, internal consistency, reproducibility and clinical applicability
we utilized the RQS score [11], which expands upon initiatives
such as the recent established consensus ‘Transparent Reporting of
a multivariable prediction model for individual Prognosis or Diag-
nosis’ (TRIPOD) statement, albeit in a radiomics context. Although
the RQS score makes no claims about the overall signi?cance or
impact of a study, it may guide the reader in their appraisal of
the work?ow. The RQS score mentions the use of a biological cor-
relate in a speci?c study, but doesnot quantify nor puts in perspec-
tive the link between tumor biologic substrate and radiomics.
A good example here of the contrast between work?ow quality
and impact is a study performed by Grossmann et al. [13] which
was assigned less than half of the RQS points (mean = 38.9%) e.g.,
due to not adequately reporting the image protocol and not
addressing the cut-off values used for the different biologic end-
points while on the other hand exhibiting a sound methodology
(e.g., feature reduction, external validation) and performing a com-
prehensive genetic pro?ling of the tumors on a relatively large
study population (n = 351).
Overall, we found only minor discrepancies between lower RQS
score studies and the claims about clinical signi?cance made by
these studies. A total of 30 out of 41 papers had an average RQS
score of <30%, while only 3/30 of these studies claimed to be
non-exploratory but of signi?cant impact on clinical outcome
and/or decision-making. The other 2 studies had an average score
50 and both of these studies [14,16] addressed a potential clinical
relevance for the reported imaging biomarker. Furthermore, we
found some differences in the inter-rater interpretation of the dif-
ferent RQS score components, justifying the need for more robust
and easily interpretable methodological scoring systems for radio-
mic work?ows and reporting. The greatest difference was found for
RQS-score component ‘potential clinical applicability’, for instance
the study by Zhang et al. [42] receiving two points by two scorers
(J.v.T./E.d.J. and H.W.) and 0 points by one scorer (S.S.). This differ-
ence is related to the high interpretability of the statements made
in the conclusion section of these studies combined with a lack of
clear de?nition within the RQS score. Future versions of the RQS
scoreshould aim at making a clearer distinction between the crite-
ria for allocation of points, especially in ambiguous components
such as ‘potential clinical applicability’.
Throughout the entire radiomic work?ow major limitations
may in?uence the conclusion of the study [10,11,53]: Radiomic
studies systematically underreport study designs and (semi-) auto-
matic and manual delineations oflarge amounts of images aretime
consuming and subject to error. Moreover, selection and pre-
processing of images prior to feature extraction are very heteroge-
neous, and the terminology used for the derived image features
lack a standard lexicon, factors which might signi?cantly in?uence
the conclusion. Additionally, modeling methodology and the
reporting of outcomes in a clinical relevant fashion is lacking in a
large amount of studies.
The two major types of features extracted in the radiomic pro-
cess are semantic and agnostic [54]. Some recent studies have
focused on semantic features, which are qualitative radiologic fea-
tures, e.g., presence of cavitation, location of the lesion, presence of
pleural effusion and shape of the lesion [22,52,55–57]. These stud-
ies found signi?cant differences in the semantic features between
mutated tumors and non-mutated tumors. EGFR mutated tumors
were for example associated with air bronchogram and pleural
retraction, while KRAS mutated tumors were associated with nod-
ules in non-tumor lobes and ALK rearrangements were associated
with pleural effusion [56]. Both types of radiomic features convey
pertinent information that is complementary to each other.
Radiologist-scored semantic annotation is a time consuming and
costly process and regards non-mineable, qualitative data. There
is a stride to capture semantic databymeans of deep learning com-
puter methods to achieve higher inter-reader agreement, faster
throughput and lower variance [54]. In contrast, agnostic radiomic
features can be swiftly extracted with minimal operator input and
make up the bulk of highly mineable quantitative data.
A key hypothesis driving radiomics research is the potential to
enable a spatiotemporal and quantitative measurement of both
intra- and intertumoral heterogeneity based on medical images.
The studies presented in this systematic review lay a foundation
for such research by exploring the correlation of imaging biomark-
ers and the underlying biology. The majority of the studies pre-
sented fall within the ?eld of radiogenomics; genomic
heterogeneity within tumors and across metastatic tumor sites in
the same patient is currently thought to be a major cause of treat-
ment failure and the emergence of (targeted) therapy resistance
[58]. Phylogenetic reconstruction has revealed branched evolu-
tionary tumor growth, wherein nearly 70% ofall somatic mutations
are not detectable across every tumor region [59]. This may lead to
underestimation of the tumor genomic landscape portrayed from
single tumor-biopsy samples. Aside from (epi)genetic heterogene-
itya complex andhighly heterogeneoussynergistic interplay exists
between tumor cellular (proteomic, metabolic, morphological)
phenotype and the microenvironment surrounding the tumor bed.
Several studies investigated quantitative CT/PET-derived fea-
tures associated with genomic and proteomic tumor expression
[12–28,35,37,47,49,51]. One study (Yip et al.) found that EGFR
mutated tumors shows different metabolic tumor phenotypes on
PET than KRAS mutated tumor [22]. Another study (Aerts et al.)
found that baseline radiomic features were able to predict muta-
tion status and were also able to predict tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(TKI) treatment response [27].
The supplementary value of radiomic to current genomic
biomarkers is well illustrated in a study (Emaminejad et al.) where
a quantitative image feature-based classi?er yielded signi?cantly
higher discriminatory power than a genomic biomarker-based
(AUC of 0.78 ± 0.06 and 0.68 ± 0.07 respectively) classi?er in pre-
dicting early stage lung cancer recurrence risk [25]. Fusion of pre-
diction scores generated by the two classi?ers further improved
prediction performance to 0.84 ± 0.05, indicating that there is
non-overlapping value added by the radiomic signature.
As for the temporal heterogeneity, radiomics offers the possibil-
ity of longitudinal use in treatment monitoring and optimization
and in active surveillance. Although such applications of radiomics
(also called delta-, or D-radiomics) have yet to be explored in
depth [60], they may prove to be clinically relevant. Another new
development is the so-called ‘4D radiomics’ approach, which can
beused toquantitatively monitor treatmentover time and perform
(early) response assessment. In window-of-opportunity trials,
radiomic features extracted from images before (and after) receiv-
ing an experimental drug and prior to the start of conventional
treatment can potentially serve as predictive biomarker for clinical
endpoints such as progression-free survival and (early) tumor
response [61,62]. A recent study shows the predictive value of
radiomic features extracted from weekly CT images for NSCLC
patient outcomes [60]. Cone-beam CT (CBCT) images might also
be a good candidate for 4D radiomics, since these are generally
acquired at multiple time points during treatment [63,64].
The link and interplay of metabolic, genomic and histologic
information with clinical and imaging parameters is crucial for
the establishment of effective personalized and reliable treatment
strategies, especially in limited tissue settings. Hananiaetal. serves
as an example here by evaluating the malignant potential of intra-
ductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN’s) in order to stratify
patients for surgical resection [29]. Currently the consensus-
based Fukuoka imaging criteria are the main approach to pre-
operatively identify malignant IPMNs. With these criteria benign
lesions are incorrectly labeled for surgery 1/3rd of the time at high
volume and experienced centers, resulting in surgical overtreat-
ment. The most predictive radiomic marker (a gray-level co-
occurrence matrix (GLCM) feature) on the other hand differenti-
ated low grade (LG) and high grade (HG) lesions better than the
Fukuoka criteria (21% incorrectly labeled for surgery) with an
AUC of 0.82 at a sensitivity of 85% and speci?city of 68%. Even
when adequate cytology and/or surgical biopsy specimens are
available, radiomics offers important advantages for the assess-
ment of tumor biology. It is estimated that the error rate of cancer
histopathology can be as high as 23% and that most clinically rele-
vant solid tumors are highly heterogeneous over time at the phe-
notypic, physiologic, and genomic levels [54].
With the advent of high-resolution imaging and the use of
speci?c molecular imaging markers the future holds potential for
the more precise characterization of tumor biology. In the ?eld of
radiotherapy the biological phenomenon of tumor hypoxia, a com-
mon feature in many human and animal solid tumors that can be
visualized by means of novel molecular imaging techniques (e.g.,
the hypoxia PET-tracers FMISO, FAZA and HX4), has led to recent
enthusiasm for hypoxic radio-sensitizers and hypoxia-selective
cytotoxins as an adjunct therapy before tumor irradiation [65].
Radiomics could be a potential candidate to capture the temporal
changes of such biological processes over various tumor habitats.
An interesting development for adequate ex vivo human and
in vivo animal tissue biology characterization by means of CT-
based radiomics would be the introduction of micro-CT systems
[66]. These systems are based on a rotating system of X-ray tube
and detectors, and have a construction similar to that of human
CT except that their dimensions are adapted to small animals.
Compared with standard human CT devices, which offer an instru-
mental resolution limit of approximately 0.4 mm, therecent devel-
opment of X-ray microtomography (micro-CT) has introduced
resolutions similar to that of routine histology (spatial resolution
of in vivo micro-CT ranges from 100 to 30 mm) [66]. Although the
clinical application is limited to ex vivo human tissue and whole-
body imaging of small animals due to the high radiation exposure,
these techniques alone, or in combination with nuclear medicine
techniques (micro-SPECT/CT and micro-PET/CT) may provide more
detailed anatomical imaging information (which in turn might
capture voxel-size dependent imaging features more precisely
compared to clinical scanners) together with valuable metabolic
information.
Another promising development is the current data-sharing
efforts set in place, such as the NCI-backed Cancer Imaging Archive
(TCIA) [67]. Open access to de-identi?ed medical images, histolog-
ical, clinical and genomic data from cancer centers across the
world may aid the further development and validation of robust
biology-correlated radiomic models.
A major limitation in this systematic review is the omission of
analysis of publication bias, e.g., by means of a Funnel plot [68].
Withholding negative results from publication is especially a con-
cern in the radiomics ?eld, where the application of more sophis-
ticated machine learning and deep learning networks on vaster
amounts of clinical as well as imaging data has led to more robust
models that nearly always produce a satisfactory model. Addition-
ally, there are several limitations to the RQS score. Several compo-
nents are not always applicable to every study, e.g., clinical utility
for pre-clinical studies or ‘comparison to gold standard’ for out-
comes in which no gold standard exists for the assessment of the
outcome (e.g., tumor heterogeneity). Other components are not
described in detail in the scoring table (e.g. what should speci?-
cally be mentioned on clinical utility) in the scoring table AND/
OR are relatively ambiguous, for example in the case that only a
subgroup of features (special diversity, texture etc.) has been
extracted (in strict sense this is not feature selection). Furthermore
the interpretability of the RQS score is left to a large extent to the
reviewer, as it is not meant to report on the overall quality of a
manuscript or the research it presents, but rather to guide the
reader on a radiomic work?ow appraisal. These ?ndings indicate
that the RQS tool will require incremental improvements in order
to become a widely accepted assessment tool for the methodology
of radiomic studies. Some of these improvements include a clearer
de?nition of the RQS components including the allocation of
scores, the measurement of tool validity (criterion, content, con-
struct), and reliability.
Ourvision for the future of radiomics is intrepid, acknowledging
that fundamental questions still need to be addressed before clin-
ical applicability of radiomic imaging biomarkers will be achieved.
With the advent of pre-clinical inducible knockout system stud-
ies, whereby a speci?c target gene of interest can be inactivated at
a given time point, researchers will hopefully be able to draw more
robust conclusions in the so-far mainly correlative relationship of
radiomic features with tumor biology [26]. To ?nd imaging
biomarkers with stronger causal rather than correlative link with
biological mechanisms would in our vision require not only radio-
mic studies on a vast amount of ultra-high resolution images to
present high discrimination statistics in multiple validation sets,
but also benchmarking and standardization of image pre-
processing and featureextraction and data-sharing techniquesthat
exploit matching ontologies.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this articlecan befound, in
the online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2018.03.
033.
