Title:
Whole-lung low-dose radiation therapy (LD-RT) for non-intubated
oxygen-dependent patients with COVID-19-related pneumonia
receiving dexamethasone and/or remdesevir
Abstract:
Background: Low-dose radiotherapy (LD-RT) has produced anti-in?ammatory effects in both animal
models and early human trials of COVID-19-related pneumonia. The role of whole-lung LD-RT within
existing treatment paradigms merits further study.
Methods: A phase II prospective trial studied the addition of LD-RT to standard drug treatments.
Hospitalized and oxygen-dependent patients receiving dexamethasone and/or remdesevir were treated
with 1.5 Gy whole-lung LD-RT and compared to a blindly-matched contemporaneous control cohort.
Results: Of 40 patients evaluated, 20 received drug therapy combined with whole-lung LD-RT and 20
without LD-RT. Intubation rates were 14% with LD-RT compared to 32% without (p = 0.09). Intubation-
free survival was 77% vs. 68% (p = 0.17). Biomarkers of in?ammation (C-reactive protein, p = 0.02) and
cardiac injury (creatine kinase, p < 0.01) declined following LD-RT compared to controls. Mean time feb-
rile was 1.4 vs 3.3 days, respectively (p = 0.14). Signi?cant differences in clinical recovery (7.5 vs. 7 days,
p = 0.37) and radiographic improvement (p = 0.72) were not detected. On subset analysis, CRP decline
following LD-RT was predictive of recovery without intubation compared to controls (0% vs. 31%,
p = 0.04), freedom from prolonged hospitalizations (21+ days) (0% vs. 31%, p = 0.04), and decline in oxy-
genation burden (56% reduction, p = 0.06). CRP decline following 1st drug therapy was not similarly pre-
dictive of outcome in controls (p = 0.36).
Conclusions: Adding LD-RT to standard drug treatmentsreduced biomarkers of in?ammation and cardiac
injury in COVID-19 patients and may have reduced intubation. Durable CRP decline following LD-RT pre-
dicted especially favorable recovery, freedom from intubation, reduction in prolonged hospitalization,
and reduced oxygenation burden. A con?rmatory randomized trial is now ongoing.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Materials and methods
 Trial design
 Patients
 Intervention
 Outcome measures
 CRP response
sponders and non-responders, respectively. CRP non-responders
 Statistical analysis
 Results
classi?ed as non-responders (Fig. 6, bottom right pane.Supplemental
 Discussion
 Conclusion
 Authors contributions
 Declaration of Competing Interest
 Appendix A. Supplementary data


Text:
----------------------
The severe-acute-respiratory-syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have
caused unprecedented death and disruption. Mediated by a
cascading, hyperin?ammatory, macrophage-activating event in
the lungs [1], patients can face mortality rates of 30–50% once
dependent on mechanical ventillation [2–4]. The
anti-in?ammatory effects of low-dose, ionizing radiation therapy
(LD-RT) are well-established for multiple hyper-in?ammatory
conditions [5–12]. LD-RT has reduced in?ammatory opacities in
the lung, pro-in?ammatory markers interleukin-6 and interferon-
gamma, and increased anti-in?ammatory marker interleukin-10
in murine models of acute lung injury using intra-tracheal admin-
istration of lipopolysacharade (LPS) [13]. LD-RT directed at the
lungs may dampen COVID-19’s cytokine hyperactivity through
similar immunomodulatory pathways [14–16]. Initial reports of
LD-RT for COVID-19 demonstrated safety, reduced intubation
rates, declined in?ammatory markers, and hastened recovery in
non-intubated patients [17–19]. A recent but small randomized
trial studied LD-RT in 11 intubated patients and detected no bene-
?t compared to 11 intubated controls [20]. Further study of LD-RT
combined with current standard treatments in non-intubated
patients is warranted.
Materials and methods
Trial design
The Radiation Eliminates Storming Cytokines and Unchecked
Edema as a 1-day Treatment for COVID-19 (RESCUE 1–19) trial is
an investigator-initiated, single-institution combined phase I/II
trial. One trial cohort studied 1.5 Gy whole-lung LD-RT with con-
current dexamethasone and/or remdesevir. All participants gave
written informed consent prior to study procedures, which
included risk of second cancer and accelerated cardiovascular dis-
ease. Clinical Trial Registration Number was NCT04366791. The
research protocol was approved by the Emory University Institu-
tional Review Board.
Patients
Eligible LD-RT patients tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 using
PCR, were hospitalized, had pneumonic consolidation on either
chest radiograph (CXR) or computed tomography (CT), required
oxygen supplementation, and failed a trial of oxygen weaning.
Exclusion criteria included disease severity that was too mild
(weanable to room air) or too severe (intubated). Patients who
required oxygen levels beyond 15 L/min were transport ineligible.
Anti-pyretic medications were suspended at enrollment. Following
LD-RT, oxygen weaning followed standards of care. Patients under-
went clinical assessment at the time of enrollment and on post-RT
days 1, 3, 7, and 28, as well as optional assessment on days 14 and
21. Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) [21] was used to assess
comorbidity burden. Radiographs were permitted at any time as
clinically indicated, but obtained atleast within 1 day prior to radi-
ation, 24 hours following radiation, and at the timepoints men-
tioned above. Evaluation of serum in?ammatory, renal, cardiac,
chemistry, clotting, and hematologic markers were encouraged
daily, but obtained at least at baseline and at the timepoints men-
tioned aboved. Following trial completion, a prospective cohort of
20 contemporaneous controls was retroactively and blindly
matchedby age, comorbidityburden, and disease severity for com-
parative outcome analysis. Controls were selected from among
SARS-CoV-2-positive patients who had enrolled on a separate,
non-therapeutic, prospective institutional trial. Study investigators
were blinded to the selection and outcomes of control patients.
Controls were permitted but not required to be co-enrolled on
any therapeutic trial of COVID-19-directed drugs, including the
Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial (ACTT-1, Clinical Trial
NCT04280705). To match disease severity, eligible controls were
required to have received supplemental oxygen during hospitaliza-
tion and were excluded if they experienced rapid clinical decline
requiring intubation on the day of admission. No oxygen wean
attempt prior to enrollment was feasible for controls.
Intervention
All enrolled patients received best supportive care plus
dexamethasone and/or remdesevir prior to LD-RT delivery. Asingle
treatment of 1.5 Gy was delivered to the bilateral whole lungs with
15 megavoltage photons on a linear accelerator, utilizing a
2-dimensional technique, an anterior-posterior beam con?gura-
tion, and standard dose rates (600 MU/min). Patients in the control
cohort received best supportive care and standard of care drug
therapies for COVID-19 (i.e., glucocorticosteroids, remdesevir,
etc.) per physician discretion or therapeutic protocol without
LD-RT.
Outcome measures
Primary objectives were (1) safety and (2) ef?cacy of LD-RT
delivered concurrently with dexamethasone and/or remdesevir
[17]. Ef?cacy was explored by comparing intubation rates and time
to clinical recovery (TTCR). TTCR was de?ned equivalentlyas it was
in the ACTT-1 trial, as time from ?rst COVID-19 intervention to the
?rst day on which a subject satis?ed one of three categories: (1)
Not hospitalized, no limitations on activities; (2) Not hospitalized,
limitation on activities and/or requiring home oxygen; or (3)
Hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen. A full 24-hour
calendar day free of oxygen supplementation was required to trig-
ger the binary classi?cation of a patient as recovered. Additional
secondary outcomes explored clinical course, radiographic
changes, and clinical lab results. Clinical course was evaluated by
overall survival (OS), total hospital duration, time from admission
to clinical recovery, freedom from intubation, intubation-free sur-
vival,duration of intubation, and cumulative oxygen supplementa-
tion requirement. Intubation-free survival was de?ned as the
proportion of patients who were both alive and had not required
intubation or mechanical ventilation during hospitalization. Dis-
ease severity was assessed at baseline by oxygen requirement (L/
min) and arterial blood gas using a ratio of arterial pressure
(mmHg) of oxygen (PaO2) to fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2)
[P:F ratio]. Radiographic changes were evaluated by serial imaging.
Chest radiographs were categorized as improved (I), stable (S), or
worse (W) by comparing to the immediately preceding study by
a blinded board-certi?ed diagnostic radiologist (BW) and also
blindly assigned an ordinal 1–5 score, using an acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) scoring scale [22]. Radiological blinding
allowed knowledge of radiograph sequencing but ensured no
knowledge of cohort designation, intervention received, or timing
thereof. Chest computed tomography studies obtained at baseline
and day 7 were subjectively assessed and visually compared with-
out a standardized scoring system. Serological course was mea-
sured by serial laboratory evaluations of hematologic, renal,
cardiac, chemistry, clotting, and in?ammatory markers. Start time
to clinical recovery was de?ned as it was in prior cohorts [17], as
the time from LD-RT delivery (in the radiation cohort), as the ?rst
day of administration of COVID-19 therapy (in control patients, if
received [n = 18]), or as the ?rst full-day of hospitalization (in con-
trol patients who received best supportive care alone [n = 2]). To
control for lead-time bias from this de?nition, hospital duration
and time from hospital admission to clinical recovery were also
evaluated. Days febrile and oxygenation duration and burden were
tracked.
CRP response
During trial enrollment, durable declines in C-reactive protein
(CRP) were observed following LD-RT in most recovering patients,
while CRP rise occurred prior to poor outcomes. A subset analysis
was planned mid-trial, de?ning a predictive variable ‘‘CRP
response.” Patients who did and did not experience consistent
decline in CRP over 3 days following LD-RT were categorized as re-
sponders and non-responders, respectively. CRP non-responders
were de?ned as experiencing both of the following: (1) elevated
CRP level (>10 mg/dL) the morning prior to LD-RT (baseline), and
(2) two sequential rises in CRP above baseline among the ?rst three
daily measurements immediately following LD-RT. To control for
lab variability, rise in CRP level was de?ned as an increase of
2% above the immediately preceding result. Daily labs were
drawn approximately 24 hours apart so that duplicate or rapidly
repeated lab rises did not overestimate sequential CRP rise. Evalu-
ation was permitted to span 4 days following LD-RT in the event of
missing labs.
Statistical analysis
Wilcoxon rank sum tests, Fisher’s exact tests, and log-rank tests
were used for continuous, categorical, and time-to-event end-
points, respectively. Cumulative incidence of recovery and dis-
charge, overall survival, freedom from intubation, and
intubation-free survival were estimated and/or graphed using the
Kaplan-Meier method. Deceased patients were censored at time
of death. Univariate Cox proportional hazards models were ?t
and hazard ratios reported. Serial imaging ARDS scores were car-
riedforwardfrom Day 7 to 14 to21, if missing. CXR outcomes were
reported as mean ARDS scale scores for sequential time periods.
Median and interquartile range was calculated for laboratory val-
ues at clustered time points: hospital days 0–2, 3–5, 6–8, 9–11,
and 12–14. Univariate ANOVA (within clustered days) and multi-
variate repeated values ANOVA (between clustered days) were
used to compare changes in repeated laboratory measures. Clinical
outcomes were strati?ed in subset analysis by binary classi?cation
of CRP responders vs. non-responders. Within this analysis, t-tests
were used for continuous endpoints rather than Wilcoxon rank
sum tests because of observations of effect on outlier data points
likely to alter means rather than medians. Means were reported
wherever medians did not explain cohort differences. Statistical
analysis was performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary,
NC), and statistical signi?cance was two-sided and assessed at
the 0.05 level. To evaluate the predictive value of CRP decline fol-
lowing drug interventions alone, the same de?nition of CRP
response and strati?ed analysis was applied to controls.
Results
From June 11, 2020 to December 7, 2020, 65 patients were
screened for eligibility, and twenty-?ve were enrolled. Of these,
the ?rst twenty were treated with LD-RT and 5 were reserved as
future controls for immunologic pro?ling. None required more
than 15 L/min of supplemental oxygen, making all patients eligible
for transport. Of the 40 patients screened but not enrolled, 21 had
disease too mild to meet severity criteria, 5 declined to participate,
5 were young and likely to spontaneously recover, 5 had no docu-
mented rationale for non-enrollment, 3 had disease too severe to
meet severity criteria and were intubated before written consent,
and 1 did not ultimately meet SARS-CoV-2 eligibility criteria
(Fig. 1). Following trial completion, 20control patients hospitalized
between March 6, 2020 and November 19, 2020 and enrolled on a
separate collaborating non-therapeutic trial were blindly matched
for comparison against the LD-RT group. One control rapidly intu-
bated on the day of admission and later died and was excluded and
blindly replaced to ensure matching of disease severity at admis-
sion between cohorts.
Table 1 outlines patient demographics at the time of hospital
admission and administered COVID-19 drug therapies. Median
age was 63 (49–88). Fifty-three percent of patients were
African-American, 38% were female, and 12% were residents of
assisted living centers. None experienced altered mentation at
enrollment. Median CCI comorbidity scores were: 3 (range 1–12).
Median duration of symptoms prior to admission was 10 (range
1–15) and 7 (2–14) days following LD-RT and for controls, respec-
tively (p = 0.10). Median oxygen supplementation requirement at
the time of admission was 3 liters (range 0–15) for both cohorts
(p = 0.51). Disease severity, as assessed by median ratio of arterial
pressure (mmHg) of oxygen (PaO2) to fraction of inspired oxygen
(FiO2) [P:F ratio] was not statistically different between the
cohorts: 169 (range 122–325) compared to 183 (range 94–314),
respectively (p = 0.84). Patients in both the LD-RT and control
cohorts received COVID-directed drug therapy for a median of
7.5 days (p = 0.87). LD-RT was administered at median hospital
day 3 (range 1–8). Patients in the LD-RT cohort received COVID-
directed therapy (dexamethasone and/or remdesevir, etc.) at a
median start time of hospital day 1 (range 1–5), compared to 2.5
(range 1–6) in controls (p = 0.02).
LD-RT was delivered safely with dexamethasone and/or
remdesevir without acute toxicity or re?ex clinical, radiographic,
or serologic worsening of pneumonia. Intubation rates reduced
by 56% following LD-RT compared to controls (14% vs. 32% in con-
trols), translating to freedom from intubation at day 28 (Fig. 2) of
86% following LD-RT compared to 68% in controls, which
approached statistical signi?cance (p = 0.09). Intubation-free sur-
vival was 77% compared to 68%, respectively (p = 0.17). Statistical
differences in median time to clinical recovery (TTCR) and time
from admission to clinical recovery between the cohorts were
not detectable (p = 0.37, Table 2). Median hospital duration was
10.5 days (range 5–33) in the LD-RT cohort compared to 11.5 days
(range 3–42) in controls (p = 0.61). Additional treatment outcomes
for the entire cohort are reported in Table 2.
Radiographic improvement was not detectable between the LD-
RT and control cohorts (p = 0.72, Fig. 4). Representative CT images
from patients with high burden of pulmonary consolidations asso-
ciated with COVID-19 that radiographically worsened following
LD-RT, as well as an example of radiographic improvement, are
shown in Fig. 5.
Hematologic, renal, cardiac, chemistry, clotting, and in?amma-
tory markers were tracked from the ?rst day of hospitalization.
Plotted medians and inter-quartile ranges of serologic biomarkers
for both LD-RT and control patients are shown in Fig. 6. Decline
of in?ammatory biomarker C-reactive protein (CRP) was statisti-
cally superior in the LD-RT cohort compared with controls
(p = 0.02). Cardiac marker, creatine kinase, started higher in LD-RT
patients, but wasalso signi?cantlyreduced over controls (p < 0.01).
Lower troponin-1 levels in the LD-RT were not statistically detect-
able (p = 0.29). Liver function remained normal following LD-RT,
while transaminitis occurred in some controls, but did not reach
signi?cance(AST =0.35;ALTp=0.60).Neutrophil-to-
lymphocyte ratio trended higher following LD-RT (p = 0.12). There
were no detectable reductions (p = 0.80) in white blood cell count.
No neutropenia was observed. Renal biomarker creatinine was not
signi?cantly affected (p = 0.75). Myoglobin, erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate, lactate dehydrogenase, monocyte count, ferritin, ?b-
rinogen, procalcitonin, and interleukein-6 trended downward
after LD-RT but did not reach signi?cance or control comparisons
were not different or not available (Fig. 6).
Sixteen of 20 irradiated patients (80%) experienced durable
decline in CRP levels over 3 days following LD-RT and were classi-
?ed as CRP responders. The remaining four (20%) experienced
sequential rises in CRP above elevated baseline levels and were
classi?ed as non-responders (Fig. 6, bottom right pane.Supplemental
Fig. 1). Outcomes for these 16 LD-RT responders compared with
their 16 matched controls are shown in Fig. 3 and Table 3
(n = 32). Freedom from intubation was 100% for LD-RT responders
compared to 66% for matched controls (p = 0.01, Table 3, Fig. 3d),
translating to a reduction in intubation from 34% to 0%. As a cate-
gorical variable, none of the LD-RT responders died or required
intubation, compared to 5 of 16 matched controls (p = 0.04,
Table 3). Median duration of time intubated was 0 days for LD-
RT responders vs. 10 days in those matched controls who required
intubation. Median time to clinical recovery was 7.5 days (range
2–15) in LD-RT responders and 7 days (range 3–38) in controls
but maximum recovery time was reduced (15 vs 38 days), shown
as upper curve separation (p = 0.29, Fig. 3a). Median time from
admission to clinical recovery was 9.5 days (range 1–17) following
LD-RT compared to 9 days (range 1–41) in controls, with reduction
in maximum recovery time (17 vs. 41 days) and upper curve sep-
aration (p = 0.26, Fig. 3b). Median hospital duration was 10 days
(range 5–18) for LD-RT responders compared to 10 days (range
3–42) for controls, with reduced maximum hospitalization (18 vs
42 days) and upper curve separation (p = 0.22, Fig. 3c). The propor-
tion of patients requiring prolonged hospitalization of 3 weeks or
longer fell from 30% to 10% with the addition of LD-RT (p = 0.24)
Of the 4 patients who were CRP non-responders in the LD-RT
cohort, 2 required intubation, 3 died by day 28 (1 refused intuba-
tion), and the 4th died on day 33.
CRP decline over 3 days was observed in 18 of 20 controls (90%)
but was not predictive of outcome. Six of 18 CRP responder-
controls (33%) required intubation despite post-drug CRP decline
and both of the non-responders recovered without intubation
(p =0.36).Mean total time requiring oxygen supplementation prior
to recovery was 10.5 days (range 4–18) in LD-RT responders com-
pared to 14.3 days (range 3–42) in controls (p = 0.24). Average
daily oxygen maximums per patient were 32% lower at 7.6 L/min
(mean) in LD-RT responders compared to 24 L/min in controls
(p = 0.03,Table 3). Mean aggregated amount of oxygen supplemen-
tation (maximum daily L/min  total days oxygenated per patient)
was 56% lower at 46.2 vs. 104.5 L/min * days, respectively
(p = 0.06). Average number of days febrile (any fever) was 1.4 days
(range 0–9) vs. 3.3 days (range 0–12), respectively (p = 0.14,
Table 3), in favor of LD-RT responders. Rates of prolonged hospital-
izations of 21+ days fell from 31% to 0% among CRP responders
compared to matched controls (p = 0.04). Additional treatment
outcomes for LD-RT responders are reported in Table 3.
There were no recorded acute toxicities. The 3 deaths (15%)
observed at day 28 in the LD-RT cohort are described in Table 2.
Two patients had COVID-19 symptoms escalate despite LD-RT;
both went on to intubation and could not be weaned. The third
was a patient with a large brain meningioma who died after family
removed opted to remove supportive high-?ow oxygen. Contrary
to published mortality rates, none of the 20 blindly selected con-
trols died. No other toxicity, airway emergencies, or adverse events
were observed following LD-RT.
Discussion
This report describes 28-day outcomes of an exploratory phase
II trial of whole-lung, low-dose radiation therapy (LD-RT) given
concurrently with standard drug treatments for COVID-19-
related pneumonia. Intubation rates declined 56% following LD-
RT compared to controls, from 32% to 14%, which approached sig-
ni?cance despite a sample size of only 40 patients (p = 0.09, Fig. 2).
This reproduces ?ndings from prior reports, where intubation fell
from 40% to 10% following LD-RT [17]. Among CRP responders,
intubation was not required in any patient, compared to 31% of
matched controls. An ongoing phase III trial has been powered
based on these ?ndings. A sample size of 150 randomized patients
will be used to determine LD-RT’s effect on intubation rates and
intubation-free survival.
TTCR and hospital duration were improved following LD-RT
without drug therapies in a prior report (n = 20) [17]. In this study,
TTCR and prolonged hospitalizations were improved among CRP
responders, but not in the total cohort despite a larger sample size
(n = 40, Table 2). Outcomes may have been confounded by an
unusually favorable control population. Controls were not able to
undergo oxygen weaning trials prior to enrollment, were not all
ill enough to prioritize enrollment on therapeutic trials, and were
speci?cally excluded if they experienced rapid clinical decline on
admission. Thesefactors may have introduced a favorable selection
bias among controls, corroborated by the surprising observation
that no deaths were observed among controls.
A recent randomized trial of 11 intubated patients with
advanced COVID-19 evaluated LD-RT and observed no clinical ben-
e?t [20]. This study was small and lacked prior knowledge of effect
size to inform its power analysis but is the only published
randomized trial to date. We also observed little improvement in
CRP non-responders. Both CRP rise following LD-RT and intubation
may be indicative of disseminated or more severe COVID-19.
Mechanistically, LD-RT may be utilized best as an extinguisher of
local cascading hyperimmunity prior to dissemination and severe
organ damage. The RECOVERY trial evaluated dexamethasone with
a sample size was over 6000, where 1500 deaths had to be
observed to detect a survival bene?t for steroids [23]. The small
sample size (n = 22) in the aforementionend randomized trial rep-
resents less than 1% of the power needed to detect a bene?t equal
to that of dexamethasone [23].
Our results complement recent preclinical data reporting
reduced in?ammatory cytokines IL-6 and INF-gamma, and
increased anti-in?ammatory cytokine IL-10 in C57BL/6 mice with
induce ARDS. We report serologic reductions following LD-RT com-
pared to controls: C-reactive protein (p = 0.02) and creatine kinase
(p < 0.01), as well as cardiac marker troponin-1, liver function, and
coagulopathies (Fig. 6), suggesting LD-RT may prevent ‘‘long-
COVID” sequalae and may be detectable with larger sample sizes.
LD-RT did not exacerbate but rather decreased in?ammation and
did not promote but rather reduced biomarkers of cardiac injury.
As of July 2021, more than 186 million people globally are con-
?rmed as infected with SARS-CoV-2, leading to over 4 million
known COVID-19-related deaths. The worldwide accessibility of
LD-RT as a rapid and inexpensive potential treatment merits fur-
ther study, especially in countries with limited access to drugs or
vaccines.
Our study has numerous limitations: a blindly-matched but
non-randomized design, exploratory intent, small patient num-
bers, differing control treatments, differing laboratory and imaging
schedulesbetween the LD-RT and controlcohorts, variabletimes of
symptom onset, limited imaging (Fig. 5) and serological (Fig. 6)
studiesinthecontrol cohort beforeintervention and beyond7 days,
and lack of detailed viral load evaluations. Future work with LD-RT
will include a phase III design, lower dose ranges, detailed CD-8
and CD-4T-cell activation studies, changes in B-cell pro?les, anti-
body formation, cytokine analysis, and neutralization tests.
Conclusion
A cohort of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 safely received
LD-RT concurrently with dexamethasone and/or remdesevir,
required fewer intubations (p = 0.09), and showed reductions in
in?ammatory and cardiac biomarkers. Patients whose CRP
declined over 3 days following LD-RT had 100% survival without
intubation, fewer prolonged hospitalizations, and lower burden
of oxygen requirements. Early intervention with LD-RT after oxy-
gen dependency but prior to intubation may be an optimal thera-
peutic timeline. Further clinical trials are justi?ed.
[Clinical Trial Registration: NCT04433949].
Authors contributions
Clayton Hess: conceptualization, design, data acquisition, data
analysis, data interpretation, manuscript drafting/revision and
?nal draft review. Tony Eng: data acquisition, manuscript draft-
ing/revision and ?nal draft review. Tahseen Nasti: conceptualiza-
tion, design, data acquisition, data analysis, data interpretation,
manuscript drafting/revision and ?nal draft review. Vishal Dhere:
data acquisition, manuscript drafting/revision and ?nal draft
review. Troy Kleber: data acquisition, manuscript drafting/revision
and ?nal draft review. Jeff Switchenko: design, data analysis,
manuscript drafting/revision and ?nal draft review. Brent Wein-
berg: data acquisition, data analysis, manuscript drafting/revision
and ?nal draft review. Nadine Rouphael: design, data acquisition,
data analysis, data interpretation, manuscript drafting/revision
and ?nal draft review. Sibo Tian: data acquisition, manuscript
drafting/revisionand?nal draft review. Soumon Rudra: data acqui-
sition, manuscript drafting/revision and ?nal draft review. Luisa
Taverna: data acquisition, manuscript drafting/revision and ?nal
draft review. Alvaro Perez: data acquisition, manuscript drafting/
revision and ?nal draft review. Ra? Ahmed: conceptualization,
design, data interpretation, manuscript drafting/revision and ?nal
draft review. Mohammad Khan: conceptualization, design, data
acquisition, data interpretation, manuscript drafting/revision and
?nal draft review.
Declaration of Competing Interest
First (CBH) and last (MKK) authors disclose a provisional patent
and relationship with CureRays, Inc. No other relevant disclosures
for remaining authors.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2021.10.003.
