Title:
Size Effect on FRP External Reinforcement and Retrofit
of Concrete Structures

Abstract:
 The size effect on the strength of reinforced concrete (RC) beams ?exurally strengthened by surface bonded sheets of ?ber-reinforced polymer (FRP) is studied. As the failure is neither ductile nor brittle, but quasibrittle, occurring after stable growth of large cracks with large dam- age zones, the transitional size effect governed by the energetic size effect law (SEL) must be expected, which the present analysis con?rms. Owing to scarcity of size effect experimental data, ?nite element (FE) analysis is used. A powerful microplane damage constitutive model M7 for concrete, coupled with the crack band model to suppress spurious mesh sensitivity, is calibrated by ?tting the existing test data to FRP-strengthened RC specimens of diverse types, and consequently is trusted to simulate the size effect. The analysis captures the debonding near the concrete–FRP interface starting at midspan or at the end of the FRP sheet. It also captures the debonding between adjacent concrete shear cracks,and the delamination ofconcrete cover. The causesof these differentdelamination modes are explained.Simple beam-typeformulas, in which the size characteristic is not the beam depth but the length of the shear span, are proposed and validated by FE results. The use of single- lap shear tests to determine thebond strength is critically discussed. Finally, a good ?t of a few existing limited test data on the size effect ofFRP- strengthened specimens is demonstrated. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)CC.1943-5614.0001070. © 2020 American Society of Civil Engineers. 
----------------------


Text:
----------------------
Fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) sheets, serving as external (skin)
strengthening of concrete structures and as retro?t of structures
damaged, e.g., by earthquake, have been investigated for several
decades (Saadatmanesh and Ehsani 1991; Arduini and Nanni
1997). Increasing the ?exural capacity of reinforced concrete
(RC) beams or structural members with the FRP sheets is a com-
mon practice. However, the strength prediction of this type of com-
posite system is not as easy as thought in engineering practice.
The performance of external reinforcement depends on many fac-
tors, such as the strength and stiffness of the concrete and FRP, inter-
face strength, geometrical characteristics, and the design details (ACI
440.2R-17; ACI 2017). The variationof the parametersaffects thegov-
erning failuremodes of FRP-strengthened RC members. The mainfail-
ure modes of these structures are FRP debonding, FRP rupture,
concrete crushing at the compression face, and yielding of ?exural
reinforcement. Several failure modes may proceed simultaneously.
Although, based on simulations, only one mechanism dominates the
deformation growth at the peak load, the load-bearing capacity of
the structures depends on all the failure mechanisms.
The breakage of the FRP–concrete bond, called debonding, is
the failure mode considered here to control the peak load (Pmax).
There are several types of debonding failures, as elucidated by
Maalej and Bian (2001), Brena et al. (2003), Chiew et al. (2007),
and Attari et al. (2012). The failure de?nitions vary. Here the
term “debonding” refers to all the different delamination types,
shown in Fig. 1. They are the midspan debonding, intermediate-
crack (IC) debonding, end-crack (EC) debonding, cover delamina-
tion, and cover tooth delamination (Fig. 1). These debonding types
differ in the initiation point of failure, the triggering effects, the
amount of debris on the FRP surface after delamination, and the
fracture growth mechanism. As the bond at the FRP–concrete inter-
face is generally strong enough, the debonding crack occurs not at
the FRP surface but inside the concrete just next to that surface (un-
less the FRP was installed improperly). Therefore, the strength of
concrete substrate is important for the load capacity.
If the failure mechanisms were ductile and the failure obeyed plas-
tic limit analysis, the nominal strength ?N of geometrically similar
structures, de?ned as the maximum load divided by any chosen ho-
mologous cross-sectional area, would be independent of the structures
size, D, which is called the case of no sizeeffect. If thefailureoccurred
by brittle propagation of a sharp (point-wise) crack tip, then the size
effect of linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFMs), i.e., ?N ?D?1/2,
would apply. However, because the failure mechanisms are between
ductile and brittle, i.e., quasibrittle, consisting of the growth of large
damage zones, the size effect on ?N is a transition between the two
special cases (Baz?ant 1984; Baz?ant and Planas 1998; Baz?ant 2002;
Dönmez and Baz?ant 2017). Therefore, the failure of the FRP–concrete
interface should be calculated via quasibrittle fracture mechanics, and
the size effect needs to be considered in design.
Normally, RC beams should designed so that the load that causes
ductile failure by yielding of ?exural reinforcing bars would be
smaller than the load that causes brittle failure of concrete. In that
case, the size effect is avoided. However, it cannot be avoided when
the beam is externally strengthened by bonded FRP plates.
In the design guidelines, such as the ACI 440.2R-17 report (ACI
2017), the ultimate load capacity of an FRP-strengthened RC beam
under ?exure is calculated based on the assumption of rectangular
stress distribution with resulting compression Cc as shown in Fig. 1,
subject to various restrictions. Compressive force Cs due to compres-
sion reinforcement, if any, must be included. Crushing of concrete is
assumed to occur when the concrete reaches a limit strain, approxi-
mated as ?cu = 0.003. Ingeneral,concreteis assumed tohavenegligible
tensile resistance, and so only the tensile forces due to ?exural steel, Ts,
and the bonded FRP layer, Tf, are considered. The ?exure produces
tension in the bonded FRP sheet. The ultimate bending moment is
(1)
where Ms, Mf are the moment contributions from ?exural steel re-
inforcement and the FRP. According to the ACI 440.2R-17 report,
the additional ?exural strength, Mf,due to the FRP reinforcing layer
is calculated from the effective str(ess, ffe, in t)he FRP (ACI 2017):
where ?f, ?1 are empirical factors, and both equal to 0.85.
The effective stress, ffe, is the maximum stress that FRP can
resist, and is calculated as
(3)
Here Ef is the Young’s modulus of FRP, c is the depth from top face
to the concrete compression resultant, and ?i is the initial strain of
(2)
concrete at the moment of FRP installation. The effective FRP de-
sign stress ffd is limited by the design strain, ?fd, which is speci?ed as
(4)
Here ? is an empirical factor equal to 0.41 (0.083 in the United
States customary system or USCS), n is the layer number (ply num-
ber), and tf is the FRP sheet thickness. The design strength, ffd, is
lower than the tensile strength of FRP, ffu. Aside from the safety
factors, the type of surface treatment, the shear strains in the bond-
ing (adhesive) layer, the relative slips between the concrete and
FRP sheets, and the imperfections on the bonding surface are ne-
glected in design. The main reason for the limitation of the effective
stress (or strain) is the strength of the concrete substrate.
Eq. (4) is a modi?ed version of the Teng et al.’s (2003) model,
which is based on the effective bond length concept deduced from
single-lap shear tests (SSTs). Accordingto this concept, there exists
an effective bond length beyond which a further increase of the
bonding length will have no effect on beam strength.
To take into account the fracture size effect, a different approach to
the strength of RC members reinforced by FRP sheets is proposed
here. Because the fracture process zones (FPZs) are large (approx-
imately 0.5 m for concrete, but only about a few micrometers for
metals), i.e., nonnegligible compared with the cross-sectional di-
mensions of the structure, the size effect on the mean nominal struc-
ture strength, ?N, must be expected to be of theenergetic(rather than
J. Compos. Constr.
statistical) type, and because large cracks develop before the max-
imum load, the size effect must be of type 2, which is most easily
demonstrated by the dimensional analysis of energy balance (see
A3 in Dönmez and Baz?ant 2019). This means that, to obtain the
nominal strength ?N for any structure size D, the nominal strength,
?N0, due to concrete and FRP calculated by the traditional strength
theory (or limit analysis) should be multiplied by the size effect
factor ?s, i.e.,
(5)
Here D0= constant = transitional structure size, and a = shear span
(factor ?s has been introduced in 2019 into the provisions for beam
shear, punching, and strut-and-tie model of ACI design code
ACI-318-2019). For FRP reinforcement, ?N needs to be based on
the shear span and on web width bw, and ?N0 is de?ned empirically
as in classical analysis:
(6)
(7)
Here Ec, Es = Young’s moduli of concrete and steel; ?= empirical
correction factor; If, Is= moments of inertia about the neutral axis
of the transformed cross sections of FRP and steel reinforcements, re-
spectively; ?1 = 1.1, ?2=2.5, n1 = 0.5, and n2 =2. The empirical pa-
rameters in Eqs. (5)–(7) need to be calibrated by ?tting the database.
There are no experimental data available to validate and calibrate
the described model. Therefore, similar to other recent successful
studies, a realistic constitutive and fracture model is validated
and calibrated by experimental data that exist. The model is then
used to predict the size and shape effects through computer ?nite
element (FE) simulations.
As a realistic damage constitutive model, the microplane model
M7 (whose coding can be freely downloaded from the correspond-
ing author’s website) is chosen. M7 is the latest in a series of micro-
plane models for concrete developed at Northwestern University
(Caner and Baz?ant 2013a). The material properties are character-
ized by a relation between the stress and strain components (or
forces and displacements) on the microlevel (Baz?ant and Oz?bolt
1990) (or, more precisely, the mesolevel). The stress–strain rela-
tions are de?ned not in terms of the macrolevel continuum tensors,
but in terms of the stress and strain vectors on planes of all possible
orientations within the material, called the microplanes.
The microplane model, M7, which is designed for an explicit
numerical algorithm, has been shown to be capable of realistically
predicting the concrete damage behaviors over a broad range of
loading scenarios (Caner and Baz?ant 2013b; Dönmez and Baz?ant
2017; Rasoolinejad and Baz?ant 2019). It is always convergent,
robust, and has been applied in dynamic problems with more
than 3×107 unknowns (nodal displacements or degrees of free-
dom). The present simulations are performed on ABAQUS,
where M7 is inserted as a user’s material subroutine VUMAT.
To prevent spurious mesh sensitivity, the crack band model is
used as the localization limiter (Baz?ant and Oh 1983). To minimize
accuracy loss due to scaling of thepostpeak, aconstant element size
hc (equal approximately to 1–2 times the maximum aggregate size)
is adopted for structures of all sizes. All the computations include
eight-node hexahedral elements for concrete and two-node beam
elements in 3D space for steel reinforcement. The FRP material
is modeled by four-node shell elements. Because the response of
FRP material is almost linear until rupture, a linear elastic behavior
is adopted in the numerical analyses for the FRP plates. Perfect
bonding features between the concrete–FRP sheet and concrete–
reinforcing steel bars are assumed and implemented in the numer-
ical analyses. To calibrate the free parameters of M7, FE program
with M7 is optimally ?tted to all relevant available test data. The
adjustable parameters of M7 suf?ced to match the main properties,
i.e., the post-peak behavior, fracture energy, and strength values.
The steel is modeled as a bilinear elasto-plastic or hardening plastic
material. The FRP materials, both carbon ?ber-reinforced polymer
(CFRP) and glass ?ber-reinforced polymer (GFRP), are simulated
as linear elastic up to rupture.
The bond characteristics of the FRP–concrete interface have gener-
ally been assessed by SSTs [Fig. 2(a)]. In SSTs, the tension in the
FRP is transferred to the concrete substrate by bond shear stresses
of rather nonuniform stress distribution. Most of the FRP–concrete
interface does not contribute strongly to resisting the transverse
shear force in the beam. Only a certain active zone of effective
length Le within the total bonding length Lb does. Once the shear
stress of the concrete substrate reaches the strength value, cracking
begins inside this zone. When Lb exceeds Le, the active stress trans-
fer begins to shift towards the endpoint of Lb. The maximum load
Pmax drops roughly when zone Le cannot propagate any further.
The FE results illustrate the shear failure mechanism of SST.
The calibration of M7 is based on the test data of Carrara et al.
(2011), as shown in Fig. 2(b). The simulations of the test data
include various bonding lengths of ?ve different SST specimens
which are Lb= 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 mm. The dimensions
of the concrete prism are 150 × 90 ×300 mm3. The compressive
strength of the concrete is 37.2 MPa and tensile strength
4.8 MPa. The CFRP plate used measures 1.3 mm in thickness
and 50 mm in width. Fig. 2(c) shows the shear stress distribu-
tions at Pmax along the CFRP–concrete interface, for ?ve Lb val-
ues. As can be seen in Fig. 2(c), the short bonding lengths are not
suf?ciently long to fully develop Le. Nonetheless, the distribu-
tion of the shear stresses shows very similar patterns along the
length from the endpoint of the bond (z). The length of an active
bond zone, in which the shear stresses transfer the tension forces
on the FRP, does not change with the total bonding length but
remains constant for all Lb values, as noted in previous studies
(Chen and Teng 2001). The progress of the shear stress distribu-
tion for Lb =150 mm until the complete failure is shown in
Fig. 2(d). The active shear zone germinates at the nearest point
to the applied load. After reaching the strength threshold of
the material, the effective interface zone shifts away from the
fractured concrete surface. Finally, failure under load control oc-
curs when the end of the FRP sheet begins to restrict the active
zone length.
The effective bonding length, Lb, is expected to be a function of
the stiffnesses of the bonded materials. The shear strength of SST
specimens is a function of Lb and the fracture energy, Gf, of the con-
crete. However, the application of the SST models tothe debonding
failures of FRP-reinforced members under ?exure is questionable,
as we show next by FE analysis.
The FE program simulating the FRP-strengthened RC beams under
?exure is used to ?t the test data sets from different studies. In the
tests of Maalej and Bian (2001), four layers (or sheets) of different
thicknesses are used to strengthen the RC beams. One layer of a
CFRP sheet has a thickness of 0.111 mm. The RC beams contain
both ?exural and shear steel-reinforcement and have a cross-
sectional dimensions of 150 × 115 mm2. The concrete cover is
31mm thick and the FE size is 20 mm. The control beam speci-
men with no FRP reinforcement fails by steel bar yielding, fol-
lowed by concrete crushing. The specimen with 1 FRP layer
(1L) fails by debonding at midspan (IC debonding); for two lay-
ers (2L), by end debonding and IC debonding; for three (3L) and
four layers (4L) by delamination followed by end debonding. The
FE simulations con?rm that a slightly different failure load can
correspond to very different failure modes. For example, the
1L specimen in Maalej and Bian (2001) failed by FRP rupture,
but FE analysis shows that the 1L specimens failing by FRP rup-
ture and by IC debonding have very similar peak loads. There-
fore, the elastic behavior of the FRP must be modeled accurately.
The results of M7 calibration by the load-de?ection curves
are shown in Fig. 3(a). The solid curves show the FE results,
and the circle points the test results. Based on this calibration,
the responses of RC beams with more FRP layers are computed.
Fig. 3(b) shows the experimental and computed normalized
strength values as a function of the number of layers (i.e., of
CFRP thickness). The normalization is de?ned according to
the unstrengthened case. Thus, ?0 refers to the strength of the
control specimen computed according to Eq. (6). Fig. 3(b)
shows that, initially, the strength of FRP-reinforced RC beams
increases with the number of layers. However, increasing the
FRP thickness changes the stiffness difference between the
FRP-strengthened and unstrengthened RC beams. Therefore,
the FRP-cutoff point (plate curtailment) causes a change of the
failure mode for higher thicknesses of FRP sheets. In general,
thin FRP layers fail by IC debonding, and thick layers fail by
end debonding or cover delamination.
An additional increase of the FRP layer produces a high tensile
stress concentration at the FRP end (the cutoff point). The tensile
stress distribution determines the failure mode change from de-
bonding to cover delamination. An increase of the stiffness ratio
for these two modes leads causes the concrete cover to be ripped
off due to high tensile stresses at the sheet cutoff zone. This is
why, after a certain speci?c stiffness, additional FRP reinforcement
does not strengthen the beam, as seen in Fig. 3(b). The stiffness
ratio, ?, in Eq. (7) can be used to distinguish the various debonding
failure modes. The optimal ?t of Eq. (5) to the computed data is ob-
tained by substituting 1.1, 3.0, 0.5, and 2 for ?1, ?2, n1, and n2, re-
spectively [Fig. 3(b)].
The calibration result based on the second data set is shown in
Fig. 4(a) (Raoof and Bournas 2017). Here the RC beam specimens
strengthened with one and three layers of CFRP are used in the cal-
ibration.The beams havearectangular cross-section with dimensions
of h×bw = 203×102 mm2, and the shear span is a= 580mm. The
thickness of the concrete cover is 27mm and the element size hc =
20mm. The ?exural steel reinforcement ratio is ?f = 0.56%, and
the shear reinforcement (stirrups) ratio ?s = 1.23%. The control
specimen (with 0 layers) fails by yielding of ?exural steel followed
by concrete crushing on the compression face. The intermediate
(midspan) cracks trigger the delamination failure of the 1L beam.
The main failure mode of the 3L beam is a mix of IC debonding
and end debonding. Fig. 4(b) also shows the result of extrapolation
to higher thicknesses. The nominal strength of the strengthened
member decreases when the number of layers is greater than three,
which corresponds to the critical value of ? = 0.35. Another data
set with M7 calibration is based on the tests of RC beams strength-
ened with sheets of GFRP (Chiew et al. 2007) [Fig. 5(a)]. The
beams are strengthened with one, two, and three layers of
GFRP sheets. The cross-sectional dimensions are 350×200
mm2 (h × bw) and the span is a= 800 mm. The thickness of the
concrete cover is 33 mm and the element size hc = 25 mm. The
?exural and shear steel reinforcement ratios are ?f = 0.63%
and ?s = 0.52%, respectively. The control specimen (zero layers)
fails by yielding of ?exural steel followed by concrete crushing on
the compression face. The intermediate (midspan) cracks trigger the
delamination failure of the beams with one and two layers of GFRP.
The main failure mode of the beam with three layers is a mix of IC
debonding and end debonding. Fig. 5(b) shows the extrapolation for
higher thicknesses and the variation of nominal strength according
to the number of GFRP layers. For the size effect analysis of RC
beams strengthened with FRP, additional parameters regarding the
test data and numerical work are given in Table 1.
In the size effect analysis, the shear span (a) is chosen as the char-
acteristic length of the FRP-reinforced beams. The main failure
modes should not change with geometrically scaling according to
the main principles of the size effect equation used in Eq. (5). Dif-
ferent failure modes require some modi?cations in the size effect
law which is not considered here. Debonding cracking mainly oc-
curs along the FRP length. The widths of the FRP plates in the tests,
which are chosen to conduct the numerical work, are the same with
the beam width bw. The width of the FRP plates may be smaller
than the beamwidth, which leads to less ?exural rigidity than the
case of full width. As the bending of structures in this study can
be accepted as an in-plane loading case, narrower FRP width
would not change the bending mechanism. Eq. (6) gives the
strength de?nition for this type of failure. The geometric scaling
of the FRP-strengthened RC beam requires proportional scaling
of both the RC beam and the FRP reinforcement. The effects of
the boundary layers are minimized by using a two-dimensional
(2D), rather than three-dimensional (3D), scaling of the structures.
Thus, the beam dimensions should be scaled while keeping the
width, bw, and the reinforcement ratio constant.
The predictions for larger sizes and a different number of FRP
layers, based on calibrations by three different data sets, are shown
in Fig. 6. The size effect specimens are simulated using the FE
crack-band microplane model M7, for 2D geometrical scaling,
up to four different sizes. All the layer numbers refer to the small-
est specimen, and the number of the layers (or layer thickness)
scales in proportion to specimen size. The values of ?N0 and D0
are found throughnonlinear regression. The given relative strength
values are normalized by zero layer strength, ?0. The cross marks
refer to M7 predictions and the circle points to the test data. The
dashed horizontal line refers to the strength of the control speci-
men (0 layers).
Fig. 6(a) presents the results of the size effect analysis for the
?rst data set. Baz?ant’s type 2 (Baz?ant 1984) size effect law matches
the data for every delamination type and every number of layers.
J. Compos. Constr.
The ordinates, log?N/?N0, represent the ratio of the nominal
strength to that of a beam with no FRP. In other words, the size
effect occurs only for the additional beam strength due to FRP re-
inforcement. As expected, the deviation from the SEL curve in-
creases as the nominal strength of the beam approaches the
horizontal dashed line ?N/?N0=1, indicating the strength of the
beam with no FRP reinforcement.
The failure mode may switch to the failure mode of the control
specimen or a different mode of delamination as the size increases.
This depends on which part of the FRP reinforcement gets
debonded. For instance, for the IC debonding failure mode, the
crack usually propagates from the middle to the FRP layer end.
Therefore, some parts of the FRP reinforcement could still be active
in the midspan region. This uncracked part of the beam contributes
to the moment capacity of the base structure. Thus, the deviations
from the SEL curve may start above the horizontal line as is usually
seen in the case of one layer of FRP reinforcements. However, the
nominal strength cannot go below the zero layer limit, because the
governing failure mode of the control specimens is the yielding of
steel followed by the crushing of concrete, in which the size effect
is absent (or small, if the concrete is crushing, which should, of
course, be precluded in design).
Figs. 6(b and c) show broader size predictions using the cali-
bration of M7 based on the second and third data sets. The results
of the size effect simulations are similar. In addition, the experi-
mental veri?cation of the size effect in this failure type was
(b)
Fig. 7. (a) Numerical results demonstrate the shear stress contours and
FE mesh with cracking pattern; (b) the variations of shear stress along
the FRP–concrete interface for both large and small beams; and (c) size
effect behavior for four different sizes of FRP-strengthened beams
without steel reinforcement.
conducted in Maalej and Leong (2005). In this study, beams of
three different sizes, with the size ratios of D : 2D : 3.2D, were
analyzed with 3D scaling. The M7 simulations ?t the test data ad-
equately, as seen in Fig. 6(d).
All the predictions and tests document a signi?cant size effect,
which cannot be neglected in design.
The steel reinforcement obstructs the simplicity of the size effect
curve, owing to a change of the failure mode for larger FRP
strengthened beams. The simple curve of the SEL can be obtained
by removing from the beams the ?exural steel reinforcement
(Fig. 7). Figs. 7(a and b) show the shear stress distribution along
the length of concrete–FRP interface, for both small (size D) and
large (size 2D) beams, at the maximum load, Pmax.
The failure mechanism is not the same as it is for the SST spec-
imens in Fig. 2. As the beam bends, tensile stresses in the cross-
section below the neutral axis increase. As the tensile strength of
concrete is relatively low, the ?exural cracks propagate towards
the neutral axis, whose location moves as the cross-sectional
stresses change. The shear forces in these cracked sections transfer
into the FRP–concrete interface, creating a sharp shear stress con-
centration. Further bending of the beam creates new cracks and
sharp shear stress concentrations next to each other, with slightly
inclined orientations due to shear cracking effects, as shown in
Figs. 7(a and b). The failure occurs when several adjacent segments
(or toothlike segments of the concrete cover) coalesce to form a de-
bonding zone with an abrupt load drop. The number of coalescing
segments depends on the balance between the strain energy re-
leased and the energy dissipated by fracture. Therefore, large
beams with thin FRP reinforcement may fail even by the debonding
of one segment. That is the source of the early deviation from the
SEL in one layer of the FRP-strengthened specimens (Fig. 6).
On the other hand, the highest energy release can be achieved in
small beams with fewer numbers of layers. However, these types of
interface debonding usually do not occur exactly at the FRP–
concrete interface because the FRP stiffness provides high con?ne-
ment on the neighboring concrete layer. Therefore, the elements
above the interface layer, which have weaker con?nement, can ini-
tiate the delamination fracture by leaving concrete debris on the
FRP inner surface.
The texture of the toothlike segments in the concrete cover does
not change with size. The failure mode and location of the cracking
initiation are the same for geometrically scaled structures, as shown
in Fig. 7(c). The stress states at the homologous points are similar
for large and small beams, and the SEL ?ts the data without any
horizontal limit. Therefore, the FPZ can be regarded as constant
for geometrically scaled beams. What matters is the relative stiff-
ness value or the ratio of the stiffness of the unreinforced and
FRP-strengthened cases, ? in Eq. (7), which does not change
with 2D or 3D scaling. These facts make the failure mechanisms
of FRP-strengthened beams different from the SST specimens.
Another validation of the uniform trend of size effect without
steel reinforcement is provided by Fig. 8, showing the test data
of Carloni et al. (2017). The concrete prisms of dimensions 150 ×
150 × 600 mm3 and with a half-depth notch are subjected to three-
point bending. The specimens are strengthened with steel ?ber-
reinforced polymer (SRP) composites on their tension face. Two
different SRP plates are used in these tests. MD in Fig. 8 refers
to the medium density ofsteel strips whereas HD refers tohigh den-
sity, which corresponds to two different equivalent thicknesses of
the bonded plates. The calibration of M7 is based on the load versus
midspan de?ection behavior of the tests for both MD and HD spec-
imens, as shown in Fig. 8(a). The prediction for larger sizes is
shown in Fig. 8(b). Similar to the results displayed in Fig. 7(c),
the numerical results exhibit a clear size effect trend.
The results of this study, which deals with an important problem of
the size effect on externally bonded FRP systems for strengthening
concrete structures, are shown to be applicable to both the FRP sheets
(cured in situ) and the laminates (pre-cured pultruded systems) used
to strengthen beams or slabs in ?exure. For the shear strengthening
of RC beams or slabs, the size effect factor for beam shear, recently
introduced into ACI-318 design code, must also be applied.
Although the restraint of FRP by the bonded concrete prevents
cracking just next to the bonded FRP surface, cracking generally
develops deeper in the concrete substrate than the bond surface.
Geometrically scaled FRP-strengthened RC beams exhibit a sig-
ni?cant energetic size effect. However, the size effect applies only
to the additional beam strength owing to the FRP reinforcement.
Deviations from the energetic SEL occur for large sizes for
which the nominal strength of the beam approaches the nominal
strength owing to the ?exural steel reinforcement alone. This is
the strength of the case of no FRP strengthening.
The differences among the delamination failure modes can be
attributed to the ratio, ?, of the bending stiffnesses of steel and
FRP reinforcement. Increasing the thickness of FRP sheets
makes ? larger and shifts the fracture initiation towards the FRP
end. The competition between the failure modes of delamination
is determined by the relative importance of tensile and shear
stresses for the fracture initiation.
Placing the end (or cutoff point) of the FRP sheet inside the shear
span of the FRP-reinforced beam changes the failure mode for
higher FRP thicknesses to the cover delamination. The stress con-
centration at the cutoff point causes ripping off the concrete at the
cutoff point, which triggers delamination failure and lowers the
beam strength values. FRP sheet designs extending slightly beyond
the point of delamination could help to avoid this type of failure.
Eq. (5) can be used to de?ne the strength of the debonding fail-
ures of the FRP–concrete interface. The size effect factor in this
equation is denoted as ?s. The shear span, a, should be used in ?s
as the characteristic structure size. For smaller sizes, the beam
strength is, in Eq. (6), de?ned as a function of the concrete com-
pressive strength fc, and the ratio, ?, of the bending stiffnesses of
the FRP sheet and the steel reinforcements.
The effective length concept for the SST specimens cannot
be applied directly to the RC beam problems. The failure and
energy release mechanism of a bending specimen is different
than it is in direct shear failures. Moreover, the geometrical
scaling of an FRP-reinforced member under ?exure does not
change the FPZ in debonding failures, whereas in SST, the
FPZ changes depending on the axial stiffness of FRP (or another
elastic material). The FPZ of debonding cracks in the RC beam is
much longer than the FPZ in SST. More importantly, the initial
?exural and shear-?exural cracks in the shear zone create in the
concrete cover small toothlike segments, and these segments fur-
ther prevent the shear zone length from reaching the full effec-
tive length.
Some or all data, models, or code generated or used during the
study are available in a repository online in accordance with
funder data retention policies (http://www.civil.northwestern
.edu/people/bazant/s).
Brena, S. F., R. M. Bramblett, S. L. Wood, and M. E. Kreger. 2003.
“Increasing ?exural capacity of reinforced concretebeams using carbon
?ber-reinforced polymer composites.” Struct. J. 100 (1): 36–46.
Caner, F. C., and Z. P. Baz?ant. 2013a.“Microplane model m7 forplain con-
crete. I: Formulation.” J. Eng. Mech. 139 (12): 1714–1723.
Caner, F. C., and Z. P. Baz?ant. 2013b. “Microplane model m7 for plain con-
crete. II:Calibration and veri?cation.” J. Eng. Mech. 139 (12): 1724–1735.
Carloni, C., M. Santandrea, and I. A. O. Imohamed. 2017. “Determination
of the interfacial properties of SRP strips bonded to concrete and com-
parison between single-lap and notched beam tests.” Eng. Fract. Mech.
186: 80–104.
Carrara, P., D. Ferretti, F. Freddi, and G. Rosati. 2011. “Shear tests of car-
bon ?ber plates bonded to concrete with control of snap-back.” Eng.
Fract. Mech. 78 (15): 2663–2678.
Chen, J. F., and J. G. Teng. 2001. “Anchorage strength models for FRP and
steel plates bonded to concrete.” J. Struct. Eng. 127 (7): 784–791.
Chiew, S.-P., Q. Sun, and Y. Yu. 2007. “Flexural strength of RC beams
with GFRP laminates.” J. Compos. Constr. 11 (5): 497–506.
Dönmez, A., and Z. P. Baz?ant. 2017. “Size effect on punching strength of
reinforced concrete slabs with and without shear reinforcement.” ACI
Struct. J. 114 (4): 875–886.
Dönmez,A., and Z. P. Baz?ant. 2019.“Critiqueof critical shear cracktheory
for FIB model code articles on shear strength and size effect of rein-
forced concrete beams.” Struct. Concr. 20 (4): 1451–1463.
Maalej, M., and Y. Bian. 2001. “Interfacial shear stress concentration in
FRP-strengthened beams.” Compos. Struct. 54 (4): 417–426.
Maalej, M., and K. S. Leong. 2005. “Effect of beam size and FRP thick-
ness on interfacial shear stress concentration and failure mode
