Document Infomation ===========>
Title=Impact of the KWL reading strategy on mathematical problem-solving achievement of primary school 4th
Author=null
Subject=null
Keywords=null
Creator=null
Producer=Colorado State University RapidILL using ABCpdf
Creation Date=null
Modification Date=java.util.GregorianCalendar[time=1622098135000,areFieldsSet=true,areAllFieldsSet=true,lenient=false,zone=java.util.SimpleTimeZone[id=GMT+07:00,offset=25200000,dstSavings=3600000,useDaylight=false,startYear=0,startMode=0,startMonth=0,startDay=0,startDayOfWeek=0,startTime=0,startTimeMode=0,endMode=0,endMonth=0,endDay=0,endDayOfWeek=0,endTime=0,endTimeMode=0],firstDayOfWeek=1,minimalDaysInFirstWeek=1,ERA=1,YEAR=2021,MONTH=4,WEEK_OF_YEAR=22,WEEK_OF_MONTH=5,DAY_OF_MONTH=27,DAY_OF_YEAR=147,DAY_OF_WEEK=5,DAY_OF_WEEK_IN_MONTH=4,AM_PM=1,HOUR=1,HOUR_OF_DAY=13,MINUTE=48,SECOND=55,MILLISECOND=0,ZONE_OFFSET=25200000,DST_OFFSET=0]
Trapped=null

Context===========>
Rapid #: -17611997
CROSS REF ID: 64015
LENDER: EGA :: Main Library
BORROWER: CDH :: Main Library
TYPE: Article CC:CCG
JOURNAL TITLE: The Journal of educational research
USER JOURNAL TITLE: The Journal of educational research.
ARTICLE TITLE: Impact of the KWL reading strategy on mathematical problem-solving achievement of primary
school 4th graders.
ARTICLE AUTHOR:
VOLUME: 113
ISSUE: 5
MONTH:
YEAR: 2020
PAGES: 343-
ISSN: 0022-0671
OCLC #: 9653114
Processed by RapidX: 5/27/2021 2:48:43 PM
This material may be protected by copyright law (Title 17 U.S. Code)
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=vjer20
The Journal of Educational Research
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/vjer20
Impact of the KWL reading strategy on
mathematical problem-solving achievement of
primary school 4th graders
Neslihan Usta & Muamber Y?lmaz
To cite this article: Neslihan Usta & Muamber Y?lmaz (2020) Impact of the KWL reading strategy
on mathematical problem-solving achievement of primary school 4th graders, The Journal of
Educational Research, 113:5, 343-363, DOI: 10.1080/00220671.2020.1830017
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2020.1830017
Published online: 06 Nov 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 410
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Impact of the KWL reading strategy on mathematical problem-solving
achievement of primary school 4th graders
Neslihan Ustaa and Muamber Y?lmazb
aBartin, Turkey; bBartin University, Bartin, Turkey
ABSTRACT
In this study, it was aimed to investigate possible impact of using the KWL reading strategy in
teaching the topic of “fractions and operations with fractions” to the 4th graders on students’
problem-solving achievement. A quasi-experimental design with pretest-posttest control group
(CG) was employed in the study. The study group consisted of 35 4th graders studying at a pri-
mary school in Bart?n, Turkey. In the research, an experimental group (EG) and a control group
(CG) were used. There were 18 students in the experimental group (EG) and 17 students in the
control group (CG). The test of equivalency (TE), Problem-Solving Achievement Test (PSAT) to
gauge effect of instruction with the KWL strategy and reading texts were employed as data collec-
tion tools. The Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test and Mann Whitney U Test were employed in the
research. It was found as a result of the research that the KWL strategy fostered the students’
problem-solving achievement. However, there were no significant differences between the EG and
CG in terms of the scores received in the step of implementing the plan.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 1 April 2020
Revised 19 August 2020
Accepted 24 September 2020
KEYWORDS
KWL reading strategy;
problem-solving; problem-
solving achievement;
primary school students
Introduction
Our age necessitates the development of individuals’ mental
skills such as understanding, sorting, classifying, questioning,
associating, predicting, analyzing, synthesizing and evaluat-
ing. Besides, raising individuals who are critical and creative
thinkers, who are entrepreneurs, who can express them-
selves, who can communicate and who have advanced prob-
lem-solving skills is among educational policies of every
country. In recent years, various approaches have been pro-
posed for curriculums in Turkey, and improvements have
been made from time to time. In this context (Ministry of
National Education (MoNE), MoNE, MoNE, 2013; MoNE,
2018), the skills required to be acquired in mathematics cur-
riculum include communication, reasoning, association,
using information and communication technologies and
problem-solving. As at all levels of education, it is aimed to
develop problem-solving skills in primary education
(Baykul, 2014).
Aim of this study was to examine impact of the KWL
reading strategy on primary school 4th graders’ problem-
solving achievement.
Theoretical framework
Constructivism, which is a philosophical approach that
explains how individuals learn and understand, asserts the
idea that knowledge is not explored but interpreted, is not
revealed but created, that is, knowledge is constructed by
individuals. Knowledge is shaped as a result of one’s own
experiences, observations, interpretations and logical think-
ing (€Ozden, 2009). Piaget, one of the pioneers of the con-
structivist approach, explained knowledge construction as a
result of the active interaction of the individual with his
environment through successive processes called accommo-
dation and assimilation (Baki, 2014). According to the con-
structivist approach, learning is defined as “the process of
constructing meaning by connecting new knowledge with
old knowledge and experience”. The learner constructs his/
her own conceptualization and solutions of problems. This
approach acknowledges that students learn new knowledge
by adapting the information they have already learned to
their subjective situations (€Ozden, 2009). In this context,
constructivism is based on Ausubel’s “Meaningful Learning
Theory”. According to Ausubel, for a meaningful learning,
the individual should have the correct prior knowledge
about the subject to be learned and be willing and deter-
mined to learn, as well as associating the new knowledge
and the prior knowledge (Asubel, 2000, as cited by
Meydan, 2018).
According to NCTM (2000), pupils should learn math-
ematics by understanding it and actively construct new
knowledge by making use of their prior knowledge and
experiences. Principles and Standards for School
Mathematics’s (2000) learning principle is based on two
basic thoughts the first of which is learning mathematics by
understanding it. Today’s mathematics requires not only
computational skills, but also the ability to reason and think
in order to solve new problems, and to learn new ideas that
students will encounter in the future. The second is that
CONTACT Muamber Y?lmaz muammeryilmaz66@gmail.com Bartin University, Bartin, Turkey.
 2020 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
2020, VOL. 113, NO. 5, 343–363
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2020.1830017
students can learn mathematics by understanding. Learning
is developed in classrooms so that students can evaluate
their own and others’ ideas, and they are encouraged to gen-
erate and test mathematical assumptions and to develop rea-
soning skills (as cited by Van De Walle et al., 2013).
Mathematics is commonly regarded as a difficult subject
to be understood by students. To learn mathematics, firstly
it should be understood. For this, it is significant for a stu-
dent to understand what he/she reads and make out it.
There are some basic principles that should be taken into
account in addition to reading comprehension for under-
standing mathematics. One of them is concept teaching. It is
impossible for students to learn mathematics without under-
standing concepts. Understanding a concept is associating it
with existing concepts. The more a concept is associated
with the concepts it is related to, the better it is understood.
Learning mathematics requires establishing a relationship
between conceptual knowledge and operational knowledge
(Baykul, 2014). The development of mathematical thinking
depends on the conceptualization of mathematical know-
ledge and its use when necessary. Good knowledge of math-
ematical concepts facilitates to find unique solutions to new
problems that have not been encountered before (€Ozy?ld?r?m
G€um€us? & Umay, 2018). Mathematical models, various
proofing methods, and examples from mathematics itself
and from daily life can be used to understand mathematics.
Examples used in accordance with various teaching objec-
tives enrich and strengthen learning (Kula & €Oren Vural,
2019). In addition, the concept of proof can be used as a
tool in understanding the concepts and the relationship
between the concepts (Knuth, 2002). On the other hand, in
the process of problem- solving, the student can get the
opportunity to see the implementation of mathematical con-
cepts and connect the concepts with the method of oper-
ation, algorithm and equation to be used for the solution
(Schoen & Charles, 2003, as cited by Baki, 2018). In the pro-
cess of problem-solving, the individual has to use his exist-
ing knowledge actively. In particular, it is necessary to use
conceptual and operational knowledge in association. For
students, learning mathematics is possible by connecting the
prior knowledge with new knowledge. When this does not
occur, it may not be possible to understand and learn math-
ematics. (Hiebert & Carpenter, 1992, as cited by €Ozy?ld?r?m
G€um€us? & Umay, 2018).
According to Charles (1985), for solving a problem, the
student goes through cognitive processes such as under-
standing the problem sentence, selecting the necessary data
for solution, generating a solution to the problem, and
deciding whether the solution is logical or not. In this pro-
cess, the student gathers concepts and processes and applies
them to solve the problem (Bernardo, 1999, as cited by Baki,
2018). In the process of problem-solving, the student
becomes aware of his/her knowledge, investigates for solu-
tions to the problem by using his/her prior knowledge,
makes predictions and evaluates his/her solutions. In this
situation, the student uses his/her existing knowledge while
investigating for solutions to the problem, explains, analyzes,
organizes and makes sense of all information (Baki, 2018).
The development of mathematical thinking depends on
the development of mathematical skills. Problem-solving is
an important mathematical skill, too. Understanding the
problem, generating a strategy for solution, implementing
the strategy, evaluating solutions and writing a similar prob-
lem are the steps included in this process. Understanding
the problem is the most important step of problem-solving
process. If a problem cannot be identified, a solution cannot
be suggested and the problem cannot be solved. In the step
of understanding the problem, the most important critical
behaviors are to write down the things given and asked in
the problem, to explain the problem with the students’ own
expressions and to draw a figure or diagram explaining the
problem (Baykul, 2016). It is highly critical for students to
understand what they read and to explain the problem in
their own words at this step.
Not understanding the problem properly causes students
to have problems. Stating the problem in the students’ own
words and reading it as required are two important sub-
steps in understanding the problem (Baykul, 2016).
According to Ogle (1986), since the KWL reading strategy
includes activities related to determination of the students’
prior knowledge about the text to be read, what they know
and what they want to know, the student will be able to
connect the old knowledge with the new one. According to
Stephens and Brown (2000), for a student to connect the
knowledge before the reading process with the information
obtained after reading enables him/her to organize, integrate
and summarize (as cited by Ulu et al., 2016). For this rea-
son, based on the expressions of Ogle (1986) and Stephens
and Brown (2000), the idea that the KWL reading strategy
would be effective in problem-solving was determined as the
aim of the study.
A student’s solving a problem depends on his/her under-
standing it well. For providing this, he/she needs to fully
comprehend what he/she reads. Reading comprehension
means that individuals reach a new learning as a result of
associating new information they encounter in the texts with
their prior knowledge (Y?lmaz, 2019a). Reading comprehen-
sion process occurs through conscious thinking, which helps
the reader relate thinking processes, content of the text,
prior knowledge, expectations and reading purposes (Block,
2004, as cited by Erdem, 2016). Reading comprehension can
be regarded as a process of creating a new related situation
by linking the words with schemas in mind. In this process,
mental activities such as thinking on a text or problem,
searching for the reasons, drawing conclusion, interpreting,
analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating are influential
(G€unes?, 2000). KWL, one of the reading strategies, contains
activities to develop reading comprehension skill. The KWL
table used for this strategy is a reflective table indicating
what they know, what they want to know and what they
learned. Using this strategy helps the students think on a
topic before reading it and the teacher gauge what his/her
students know after reading (Nicely, 2015). The KWL strat-
egy is quite effective in developing reading proficiency. A
great number of studies have revealed that this strategy is
useful for developing students’ reading skills and raising
344 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
their achievement (e.g.: Akily, 2010; Alsalhi, 2020; Hana &
Faridi, 2015; Riswanto et al., 2014; Lou et al., 2016).
The KWL (What i know, what i want to learn, what i
learned) strategy
KWL is one of the strategies used for improving reading
comprehension skill. This strategy was developed by Ogle
(1986). This strategy was named based on the initials of
“What I know, What I want to learn, What I learned”. This
strategy provides students with the opportunity to link with
their background knowledge before reading and the know-
ledge gained during reading. Table 1 shows the chart on
which the students listed their knowledge during implemen-
tation of the KWL strategy.
A three-column table is prepared before starting reading
in this strategy and the students brainstorm ideas to reveal
all they know about the topic or problem. This information
is written in column K, which is “What I know”. Then, the
students prepare and save questions related to what they
want to find out about the topic or problem in column W,
which is “What I want to learn”. During or after reading,
the students answer the questions in column W and save
their answers in column L, which is “What I learned”
(Epc?ac?an, 2009; Y?lmaz, 2019b). The KWL strategy includes
activities to reveal what background knowledge the students
have about the text to be read prior to reading, what they
know and what they want to know. This strategy consists of
three steps as follows:
1. Step K – What I know: In this step, the students’ back-
ground knowledge and views on the new topic to be
read are concretely revealed (Hill et al., 1998). The stu-
dents are led to brainstorm (they are asked questions
about the topic) to reveal what they know about the
topic for reading. In this way, the students are provided
with textual connections before obtaining detailed infor-
mation about the text they will read. After all the stu-
dents know about the topic are revealed, this
information obtained is written in column “K” by
the students.
2. Step W – What I want to learn: In this step, the stu-
dents set personal goals for their own learning (Carr &
Ogle, 1987). They create lists of questions regarding
what they want to learn at the end of the text to be
read. They record the questions created in column “W”.
Before the students start reading, determining the pur-
pose of reading, knowing what the text to be read will
provide them, considering why they are reading, can
attract their attention to the text (Y?lmaz, 2008).
3. Step L – What I learned: In this step, the students read
the text. They answer the questions written in column
“W” during or after reading. In this way, the students
construct the meaning by associating the information
they have newly learned with their prior knowledge.
After having finished answering the questions, they
record their answers in column “L”.
The KWL strategy has been found effective in developing
reading skills by a great number of studies (e.g.: Eker, 2015;
Pek€oz, 2018; Rahayuningsih & Wulandari, 2014; Tokg€oz,
2019; €Ozy?lmaz & Alc?, 2011; Zouhor et al., 2016). Riswanto
et al. (2014) stated that the students could not read because
of their deficiencies in reading comprehension and were not
able to relate the text they read with their prior knowledge.
Active readers question for applying their schemas during
pre-reading activities, relating them with the new concept,
understanding the topics during and after reading and mak-
ing their own meanings (Alyousef, 2005; Puti, 2014; as cited
by Wijaya & Puti, 2015). Moreillon (2007) said that “reading
is making meaning from print and visual information”, and
essence of reading is to understand the message of a text or
an author accurately, thus reading comprehension requires
higher-order thinking (as cited by Wijaya & Puti, 2015).
Barton and Heidema (2002) answered the question “why
should students learn to read mathematical texts?” as follows
by citing from Martinez and Martinez (2001) and NCTM
(2000). Children discuss what happens when they read and
write mathematics. Therefore, mathematical language and
mathematical reading should be learned in order to focus
on the problems, work on them, convey ideas consistently
and explicitly, arrange arguments, develop interpreting flexi-
bility and understand own problem-solving and thinking
processes. Mathematical texts contain more concepts than
all other types of texts. As most of these concepts are
abstract, it becomes more difficult for students to under-
stand and visualize them. Students generally look for a page
of text including examples, graphs and problems to solve by
skipping statements of important information (Thomas,
1988; as cited by Barton & Heidema, 2002). On the other
hand, mathematical texts are often very short and compact,
and each sentence includes a lot of concepts and informa-
tion. The fact that the sentences have certain meanings and
connect to other sentences sensibly may cause students
wanting to read these texts swiftly not to notice important
details, explanations and underlying logic (Barton &
Heidema, 2002). Cognitively, reading is more than reading a
text aloud with correct pronunciation. Active reading con-
tains thinking on the things read. Reading comprehension
requires a reader’s synthesizing information in a text, inter-
preting, evaluating and using it selectively (Wijaya & Puti,
2015). The mathematical literacy processes are necessary
both for problem-solving and developing concepts. These
skills are necessary for solving mathematical problems as
well (Barton & Heidema, 2002). This is because of the fact
that determining, understanding and questioning the prob-
lem is primarily needed to solve a problem. The questioning
can be started with determining if there is incomplete or
extra information. Questioning helps to distinguish the
information unnecessary for solving the problem, to deter-
mine the information necessary for solving it and to create a
Table 1. The KWL chart.
KWL Chart
K-What I Know? W-What I Want? L-What I Learned?
(Source: Ogle, 1986).
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 345
solution algorithm accordingly. Via questioning can individ-
uals make a plan for solving the problem and solve the
problem if they have know-how – that is topic knowledge.
It can also contribute to decide whether solution of a prob-
lem is sensible and correct. It was expressed that the KWL
strategy encourages pupils to be mentally active during the
learning process, facilitates learning and remembering con-
cepts and topics, develops their skills in organizing their
prior knowledge and in questioning (Alsalhi, 2020).
Therefore, it can be considered as a metacognitive strategy
(Gammill, 2006). the KWL is a strategy used by teachers to
help students activate their schemas prior to reading,
improve comprehension during reading and organize their
thoughts after reading (Piper, 1992, as cited by
Alsalhi, 2020).
Shelly et al. (1997) stated that a mathematics teacher used
the KWL strategy successfully to teach mathematical opera-
tions; Siribunnam and Tayraukham (2009) mentioned that
the KWL strategy generally promote pupils to use thinking
skills and concentrate on analytical reading; Ibrahim (2012)
indicated that students can relate old and new knowledge by
using the KWL strategy actively. According to Szabo (2006),
using the KWL strategy has several advantages which are
increasing the students’ interest in topics and motivating
them to understand by activating their prior knowledge
related to the topic through brainstorming. Additionally,
students can restrict topics, increase their reading compre-
hension, learn by their own and expand their ideas and per-
ceptions regarding the topic via this strategy (Szabo, 2006).
Mathematics is related to problem-solving, and reading
comprehension is an important component of word prob-
lems (Heidema, 2009). It is known that reading comprehen-
sion develops thinking in all areas. Since reading is an active
process in which important ideas are detected, compared,
evaluated and related, it is closely related to mathematics
(Erdem, 2016). Individuals that do not have difficulty in
reading comprehension are generally able to learn to express
their opinions, to gain a different perspective, to write, to do
mathematical operations and to make connections for prob-
lem-solving (Riedel, Tomaszewski, and Weaver, 2003, as
cited by Erdem, 2016).
Studies have revealed that reading comprehension skills
are crucial for students to solve mathematical problems
(G€oktas?, 2010; Lerkkanen et al., 2005; Pape, 2004;
Passolunghi & Pazzaglia, 2005; Vilenius-Tuohimaa et al.,
2008). Nicely (2015) indicated that instruction merging
problem-solving strategies and KWL strategies increased stu-
dents’ success in solving mathematical problems.
Passolunghi and Pazzaglia (2005) emphasized that it is
necessary to have a good level of reading comprehension to
be a good problem-solver. A strong correlation was found
between the skill of mathematical problem-solving and of
reading comprehension by Vilenius-Tuohimaa et al. (2008),
between reading comprehension skill and critical thinking
skill by Aloqaili (2012) and between reading comprehension
and mathematics success by G€oktas? (2010). On the other
hand, Knopik and DeFries (1999) concluded that reading
and mathematics interact and deficiencies are
revealed together.
While Aky€uz (2004) highlighted that the KWL strategy
increased ninth graders’ achievement, Tas?l?dere and
Ery?lmaz (2012) emphasized that intervention merging read-
ing strategy and conceptual physics approach raised student
achievement significantly. Zouhor et al. (2016) found the
KWL strategy to be efficient in increasing the sixth graders’-
metacognition and physics success. Alsalhi (2020) revealed
that the KWL strategy contributed positively to the 4th
graders’ success in science courses. Phromphithak (2015)
investigated impact of the KWL strategy on 10th graders’
mathematics achievement. As a result of the research, she
found that the KWL strategy was effective in pupils’ under-
standing mathematical concepts, improving their abilities to
solve mathematical problems and promoting their mathem-
atics achievement.
There have been studies investigating the effect of reading
comprehension skill on problem-solving skill in different
dimensions and from different perspectives, and their results
were positive. Ulu et al. (2016) found that instruction of
reading comprehension and problem-solving strategies
implemented on 5th graders fostered the students’ problem-
solving achievement, reading comprehension strategies could
explain just 7,86% of the problem-solving achievement, and
the pretest scores could explain 87,80% of the change. Thus,
Ulu et al. (2016) concluded that students’ readiness levels
were more influential in predicting problem-solving achieve-
ment than their reading comprehension strategies. Vilenius-
Tuohimaa et al. (2008) revealed in their study that fluent
reading skill affected comprehension skill directly and prob-
lem-solving skill through comprehension skill. They also
stated that there is a high correlation between comprehen-
sion skill and problem-solving skill.
It was stated that good problem solvers have high com-
prehension levels (Prakitipong & Nakamura, 2006; Tertemiz,
1994), and their reading comprehension skills increase their
effect on problem-solving achievement over the years
(Grimm, 2008). According to Fuentes (1998) good problem
solvers use mental networks to create meaning, so they can
relate events in the problem text and follow the flow of
events. Grimm (2008) revealed in his study that reading
comprehension skill gained in 3rd grade is a predictor of the
development of problem-solving achievement until the end
of 8th grade. In the studies examining achievement of stu-
dents who make word-based and action-based meanings
(Hegarty et al., 1995; Moreno and Mayer, 1999; Panasuk
and Beyranevand, 2010), it was seen that the latter ones
were more successful. Because in action-based comprehen-
sion, the event fiction in the problems is analyzed rather
than the words, the relationship between the events is ana-
lyzed and the entire problem text is focused (as cited by Ulu
et al., 2016). In his study, Hite (2009) tried to eliminate the
5th graders’ deficiencies related to their problem-solving
skills by giving them reading comprehension training and
stated that achievement of the students with reading com-
prehension difficulties increased at the end of the study.
Due to the similarities between understanding stories and
346 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
understanding word problems, Fuentes (1998) stated that
reading comprehension strategies can also be used to under-
stand the problem stories. €Ozdemir and Serts€oz (2006)
stated that providing middle school 6th graders with reading
comprehension behavior had a positive effect on their math-
ematics achievement.
Ilg?n and Arslan (2012) examined the effects of problem-
solving instruction through text-based activities on problem-
solving achievement levels of primary school second graders.
As a result of their studies, they concluded that problem-
solving instruction with texts was useful for helping the stu-
dents gain the steps of problem-solving, which were
“determining possible solutions in the light of the collected
data, practicing the determined solution, evaluating solution
types, assessing the problem-solving method employed”.
Ulu (2017) investigated the impact of reading compre-
hension and problem-solving strategies of primary school
4th graders on classifying the students by high and low
problem-solving achievement. As a result of the study, it
was found that fluent reading skills had no effect on classifi-
cation of students by high and low problem-solving achieve-
ment. In addition, it was stated that the students with high
problem-solving achievement had high levels of comprehen-
sion, yet there was no significant difference between the stu-
dents with high and low problem-solving achievement in
terms of having basic skills of mathematics.
Solving mathematical word problems requires using both
mental representation skill and reading comprehension skill.
Boonen, Koning, Jolles, and Van der Schoot (2016) stated
that reading comprehension training and a realistic mathem-
atics education approach had positive effects on middle
school 6th graders’ ability to solve mathematical word prob-
lems and that developing reading skills for solving mathem-
atical word problems should be attached great importance.
In a study conducted by Nicolas and Emata (2018) to exam-
ine the development of problem-solving skills of middle
school 7th graders by employing the comprehension strategy
with an integrative approach in mathematics teaching, a sig-
nificant difference was found in favor of the experimen-
tal group.
€Ozt€urk et al. (2020) found in their study, in which they
investigated the impact of reading comprehension skills on
mathematics self-efficacy perception, mathematics attitude
and the ability to solve non-routine mathematical problems,
that there was a positive and significant correlation between
reading comprehension skills and other variables. There is a
positive and significant correlation between reading compre-
hension skill and problem-solving skill.
There have been numerous studies, some of which were
described in detail above, showing that there is a positive
and significant correlation between students’ reading com-
prehension skills and problem-solving skills (Boonen et al.,
2016; C?avus?oglu, 2010; K?l?c?, 2009; Pape, 2004; Ulu et al.,
2016; Uzun, 2010). It can be understood from these studies
that reading comprehension skills need to be developed in
early childhood (Silver & Cai, 1996; Helwig et al.,1999, as
cited by Boonen et al., 2016).
Problem-solving which is one of the methods that helps
bringing information to life, activates the students in daily
life and learning-teaching settings and encourages the stu-
dents to learn to learn (€Ozcan, 2007) is defined as the way
of reaching a solution when the solution is unknown (Polya,
1962). Thus, mathematics, itself, is considered to be a prob-
lem-solving activity. Therefore, problem-solving has been
included in curriculums as one of the basic approaches in
mathematics teaching ( MoNE, 2013, 2018; National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)), 1989; Silver, 1994). It
is necessary to apply reasoning in the process of problem-
solving (Schoenfeld, 1985). Reasoning is the process of
thinking by considering all factors and obtaining a reason-
able result. Individuals who are able to reason about a topic
have sufficient knowledge in that topic, can examine new
situation encountered thoroughly, explore, guess, infer, reach
to some results by justifying thoughts, explain these results
and offer solutions (Umay, 2003). Hence, a problem cannot
be solved unless it is understood well, and mathematical
ideas cannot be defended without showing reasons.
Although most people believe that there is only one way to
solve a mathematical problem (NCTM, 2000), each individ-
ual has his own reasoning styles and ways of solution
(Umay, 2003). In this context, students’ knowledge can be
questioned and interpreted as they compulsorily reason dur-
ing the process of problem-solving. In this process, the stu-
dents are expected to apply cognitive processes such as
understanding a problem, collecting the necessary data for
the solution, solving the problem and deciding whether the
solution is logical or not (Charles, 1985). The students have
to gather the concepts and operations during problem-solv-
ing and apply them to solve the problem (Bernardo, 1999).
Polya (1973) explained problem-solving process in steps
which are understanding the problem, devising a suitable
plan for solving the problem, changing the plan if necessary,
checking the methods, evaluating the data obtained during
problem-solving and interpreting significance of the solu-
tion. On the other hand, Gonzales (1998) suggested that a
final step, problem posing or problem writing, was necessary
to be added to Polya’s problem-solving strategy. In this con-
text, five-step grading scale received from Baki (2014) was
employed in the current study in order to evaluate each
step separately.
From the explanations made in the theoretical framework
and the results of the studies, some inferences can be made
in the context of the KWL reading strategy and problem-
solving. The first of these inferences is the way of imple-
menting the KWL reading strategy in classroom setting. A
KWL table is created before starting a new topic, and this
table can be filled in as a class or individually. Meanwhile,
the teacher should remind the students to use mathematical
concepts and terms. While filling in the table, the students
should be asked questions that would help them explain
what they have learned, how they have solved problems, and
their reasoning strategies. Secondly, the KWL reading strat-
egy helps students to activate their prior knowledge, organ-
ize their knowledge and summarize the topic in the learning
process. In this process, the students share various ideas by
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 347
brainstorming, while the teacher facilitates learning by ask-
ing them some questions. Moreover, the students organize,
analyze and interpret their knowledge by writing down what
they know and learn. Because of these features of the KWL
strategy, it can be used as an effective teaching instrument
in the problem-solving process. This stems from the fact
that problem-solving also requires organizing knowledge,
developing various solution strategies to the problems and
finding solutions. The problem-solving process requires
understanding the problem, choosing appropriate strategy
for the solution, implementing the chosen strategy, evaluat-
ing the solution, and using the solution in similar situations.
The problem-solving process requires the students to use a
variety of reasoning and problem-solving strategies. The
studies cited in this study have shown that development of
reading strategies generally improves students’ understand-
ing of mathematical concepts and their ability to solve
mathematical problems. In this study, impact of the KWL
reading strategy on solving mathematical problems in each
of the problem-solving steps in the problem-solving process
was investigated.
Teaching of fractions has an important place in mathem-
atics curriculums (MoNE, 2013, 2018). Strong conceptual
knowledge about the concept of fraction is important in the
development of the concept of number (Lazic et al., 2017).
Due to their conceptual richness and complexity, fractions
are among one of the most difficult topics to learn in math-
ematics (Alacaci, 2010; Is??k, 2011; Is??ksal, 2006).
Understanding the concepts of fractions well in primary
school and gaining the ability to do operations with frac-
tions will make the students’ daily life easier and will pro-
vide them a basis for learning other topics of mathematics
such as ratio, operations, rational numbers, decimal num-
bers and algebra (Alacaci, 2010). However, the studies in the
literature have indicated that students from primary school
to university have several misconceptions about fractions
and experience various difficulties (Alacaci, 2010; Biber
et al., 2013; Kocaoglu & Yenilmez, 2015; Misquitta, 2011;
Okur & C?akmak G€urel, 2016; Pesen, 2007, 2008; Stafylidou
& Vosniadou, 2004; Tas?k?n & Y?ld?z, 2011; Vamvakoussi &
Vosniadou, 2004). It was stated that a significant part of
misconceptions about fractions stems from the generaliza-
tion of the information valid in integers to the topic of frac-
tions (Alacaci, 2010). In addition, teaching students
numerical representation and operations about fractions ear-
lier without teaching them the important conceptual ele-
ments of fractions (Bezuk and Bieck, 1993, as cited by
Alacaci, 2010) causes them to have difficulties in learning
the topic. Therefore, the topic of fractions which is really
important in mathematics curriculums due to its being the
basis for teaching other topics of mathematics and to its
importance in daily life was discussed in the current study.
Mathematics is about problem-solving, and the abstract
structure of mathematics mostly makes it difficult to be
understood by the students. Reading comprehension is a
higher-order skill to be gained for solving mathematical
problems. Reading comprehension necessitates thinking -
that is reasoning and questioning. Problem-solving; on the
other hand, requires reasoning. Reading comprehension is
the first and foremost step to solve a mathematical problem.
In daily life or in order to solve a mathematical problem,
firstly the problem ought to be revealed, in other words, it is
needed to be understood. Understanding the problem means
that the problem is properly read and expressed.
Establishing the link between what is given and what is
asked in a problem is necessary for solving a mathemat-
ical problem.
KWL, one of the reading comprehension strategies,
includes activities to be used for developing reading compre-
hension skill. There have been several studies conducted on
reading comprehension skill and mathematics achievement
and problem-solving skill. However, no studies examining
effects of the KWL strategy on 4th graders’ problem-solving
achievement and using problem-solving steps separately and
thoroughly for solving problems about fractions have been
found in the literature. As it was expected that the KWL
reading strategy would be effective in understanding the
problem and developing an appropriate problem-solving
strategy because it establishes a relationship between old and
new information, it was used in the present study. From
this aspect, impact of the KWL reading strategy on primary
school 4th graders’ mathematical problem-solving achieve-
ment was investigated. It is believed that the results of this
study would contribute to the literature.
In this study, impact of the KWL reading strategy on
mathematical problem-solving was examined by considering
each of the problem-solving steps thoroughly. One of the
two reasons for this was the fact that knowing at what level
the students put forward their problem-solving steps, the
processes and thoughts they have carried out at each step of
the problem-solving process and the steps they have diffi-
culty provides the teachers with the opportunity to know
their students more closely (Baki, 2018). In each of the
problem-solving steps, there are various procedures to be
followed by the students. It is believed that knowing in
which of the problem-solving steps the student has difficulty
is important in terms of the precautions to be taken in the
learning process. The second reason was that problem-solv-
ing covers the whole process from understanding the prob-
lem to checking the accuracy of the result obtained. In this
study, impact of the KWL strategy on students’ achievement
in each step of problem-solving and their overall problem-
solving achievement was investigated.
Problem statement of the current research was to reveal
“impact of the KWL reading strategy on mathematical prob-
lem-solving achievement of primary school 4th graders”.
Aim of the study was to investigate impact of the KWL
reading strategy on primary school 4th graders’ problem-
solving achievement.
Aim of the study
This research aimed to examine impact of using the KWL
reading strategy to teach the primary school 4th graders the
learning area of “numbers and operations”, the sub-learning
area of “fractions” and the topic of “fractions and operations
348 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
with fractions” on the problem-solving achievement of stu-
dents. Accordingly, sub-problems of the study were deter-
mined as follows.
Sub-problems of the study
1. Are there any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement pretest scores of the EG
students on whom the KWL strategy was employed and
of the CG students on whom current instructional pro-
gram was employed?
2. Are there any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement posttest scores of the EG
students on whom the KWL strategy was employed and
of the CG students on whom current instructional pro-
gram was employed?
3. Are there any statistically significant differences between
pretest and posttest problem-solving achievement scores
of the EG students on whom the KWL strategy
was employed?
4. Are there any statistically significant differences between
pretest and posttest problem-solving achievement scores
of the CG students on whom current instructional pro-
gram was employed?
Methodology
Model of the research
A quasi-experimental design with pretest-posttest control
group was employed in the study. This design provides great
statistical potential to the researcher about testing the effect
of intervention on dependent variable, and helps interpret-
ation of findings obtained within the context of cause and
effect (B€uy€uk€ozt€urk, 2011). The tests used in the experimen-
tal group (EG) and in the control group (CG) during the
study were given in Table 2. Accordingly, in both of the
groups, test of equivalency (TE) and Problem-Solving
Achievement Test (PSAT) were employed as the pretest
while Problem-Solving Achievement Test (PSAT) was used
as the posttest. Implementation with the KWL reading strat-
egy was used in the experimental group while implementa-
tion based on the current instructional program was applied
in the control group. The empirical design of the research
was given in Table 2.
Study group
The research was conducted in 2018–2019 academic year.
The study group consisted of thirty five 4th grade students
studying at a primary school in Bart?n, Turkey. The EG
included 18 students, and the CG included 17 students.
Both groups were taught in accordance with the learning
outcomes of the topic of fractions included in 4th grade
MoNE (2018). The ready-made groups were preferred to
create the EG and CG. Equal groups were determined after
the implementation of the test of equivalency, and one of
them was assigned as the EG, while the other was assigned
as the CG. Instruction was implemented using the KWL
reading strategy in EG, while it was implemented using the
activities in the current MoNE (2018) in the CG. The imple-
mentation lasted 20 lesson hours in each classroom.
Data collection tools
Test of equivalency (TE), Problem-Solving Achievement
Test (PSAT) to gauge effect of instruction with the KWL
strategy and reading texts prepared to be used in both
groups were employed as data collection tools. The reading
texts were chosen from primary school 4th grade
Turkish coursebook.
Test of equivalency (TE)
A prior knowledge test prepared for primary school 4th
graders by G€ung€or (2014) was used as test of equivalency in
this research. This test was conducted in order to determine
whether the groups were equal or not. The validity and reli-
ability of the test had been provided by G€ung€or (2014), and
the reliability coefficient had been found to be 0.71. The test
was applied to both groups. The purpose of applying this
test was to compare initial achievement levels of the EG and
CG students. In the test of equivalency, there were questions
about learning outcomes of addition, subtraction, multiplica-
tion, reading natural numbers, writing natural numbers, and
greatness-smallness in natural numbers. The Test of equiva-
lency was given in Appendix 1.
Problem-solving achievement test (PSAT)
A PSAT including 9 problems, which were analyzed for val-
idity and reliability, about the topic of “fractions and opera-
tions with fractions” was prepared by the researchers
benefitting from the literature (Baykul, 2016; €Ozc?elik, 2018;
Posamentier & Krulik, 2016; Yazgan & Arslan, 2017) in
order to evaluate students’ problem-solving achievements. In
the analysis of PSAT, each step of the problem-solving pro-
cess that are understanding the problem, devising a plan,
carrying out the plan, looking back and suggesting a prob-
lem was considered as a separate sub-problem. In order to
ensure the content validity of the problems in the test before
implementation of the PSAT, two content area experts, a
Table 2. Model of the research.
Pretest
Posttest
Groups Test of equivalency Problem-Solving Achievement Test Implementation Problem-Solving Achievement Test
EG   Instruction with the KWL Reading Strategy 
CG   Instruction with Current Instructional Program 
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 349
mathematics teacher and a classroom teacher working at a
secondary school were asked to express their opinions about
the test in terms of content, level and language. Then, PSAT
was finalized, and a pilot study was conducted with 20 stu-
dents to provide reliability of the research and to see avail-
ability of the data collection tool. Necessary editions were
made as a result of the pilot study, and a lesson hour
(40minutes) was regarded enough to answer the questions.
Thus, the problem-solving achievement test, as a data collec-
tion tool, consisted of 9 problems. The questions in PSAT
were prepared in accordance with the learning outcomes of
the topic of “fractions and operations with fractions”
included in MoNE (MEB, 2018) which were “Students will
be able to recognize simple, compound and integer fractions
and to show them with models. They will be able to com-
pare and to sort unit fractions. They will be able to deter-
mine a specified fraction of a quantity. They will be able to
compare up to three fractions whose denominators are
equal. They will be able to add and subtract fractions with
equal denominators. They will be able to solve problems
that require addition and subtraction with fractions”.
Instruction was implemented using the KWL reading strat-
egy in the EG, while it was implemented using the activities
in the current curriculum in the CG. During the implemen-
tation of the tests, the students were given detailed explana-
tions by the researchers and were asked to solve the given
problems in a lesson hour by considering each step. In the
present study, the students’ answers were evaluated by the
progressive scoring scale, received from Baki (2014), in
which each step used in problem-solving process was scored.
This scale was preferred as the students’ behaviors of prob-
lem-solving and writing a similar problem were examined
separately. The progressive scale consists of five categories.
Under these categories, there are four criteria (3, 2, 1, 0)
describing the highest and the lowest performance of each
criterion. Thus, the maximum score to be received from
each step by a student would be 3, while the minimum score
would be 0. Therefore, a student could receive 3 points at
maximum and 0 point at minimum from a problem. The
responses given to 9 problems by the students were scored
by the progressive scoring scale, and a scoring in the range
of 3-2-1-0 was made for each category in this scoring scale
by the researchers. In this scoring, the scores received at
each step by the students were evaluated separately. The
Problem-Solving Achievement Test (PSAT) and the
Progressive Scoring Scale (PSS) were given in Appendix 2
and Appendix 3 respectively.
Procedures
There were 18 students in the EG who were taught using
the KWL strategy and 17 students in the CG who were
taught in accordance with current instructional program.
The data of 4 students in the CG were not included in the
study since they had not attended the lessons regularly. The
studies carried out during the empirical process were pre-
sented in Figure 1. Instruction was implemented according
to the KWL strategy in the EG and to current Mathematics
Curriculum in the CG by the primary school 4th grade
class teacher.
Before starting the implementation, the 4th grade class
teacher and the EG students were informed about the KWL
strategy, and they were told about things to be done during
the implementation. Instruction with the KWL strategy was
Figure 1. The empirical study process.
350 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
carried out with 9 texts chosen from 4th grade Turkish
coursebook. The reading texts were studied using the KWL
strategy in the EG. These reading texts were as follows:
“A Memory of Mustafa Kemal, The Snake and Man, A memory
of Atat€urk, The World is Round, Virtual Illness, The Source in
Nature, The Seed Looking for Home, Colors Hidden in the
Light, The Great Legend”.
The topic of fractions was taught to the EG by the same
teacher in the Math lessons using the KWL strategy. The
implementation lasted for 20 lesson hours. The study of the
two students in the EG about the reading texts “Colors
Hidden in the Light” and “The World Is Round” were given
in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively.
In the EG and CG, 13 mathematical activities about the
topic of fractions and operations with fractions in primary
school mathematics course book were implemented.
However, the mathematical activities in the EG were carried
out by using the KWL strategy. The mathematical activities
performed by 2 students in the EG using the KWL reading
strategy were given in Figure 4. The activities were carried
out in mathematics and Turkish lessons synchronously.
PSAT was applied to the EG and CG students as pretest and
posttest before and after the implementation.
The KWL table is a reflective chart showing what students
know, what they want to learn and what they learned (Ogle,
1986). The teacher firstly asked the students to create their
own KWL charts after giving them brief information about the
KWL. At the beginning of the implementation, the students
were asked questions about the topic in order to reveal their
prior knowledge via brainstorming. The students were required
to remember their background knowledge and take notes by
doing brainstorming. They wrote this knowledge on ‘K’ col-
umn of the KWL chart. After they became familiar to the
problem, the problem statement was read and definition of the
problem was made. In this step, the given and the asked things
in the problem were identified, and the students were asked to
draw a figure or schema related to the problem. They moved
to the step of understanding and interpreting the knowledge
with this step. They wrote what they wanted to learn or
thought they knew on ‘W’ column of the KWL chart. In these
two steps, they started to link the knowledge they knew or
thought they knew to the knowledge they wanted to know.
After reading the problem and entering into the process of
interpretation, the students wrote what they learned from the
problem on ‘L’ column, which is ‘what I learned’. By this way,
the students, who organized and arranged their knowledge
moved to the second step of problem-solving – devising a
plan. Devising a plan is creating a solution strategy for the
problem by organizing the data and identifying all information
included in the problem. This step contains remembering the
current problem, similar problems and solutions. In this case,
it means that the student has established a link between his/
her prior knowledge and new knowledge. If the student has
strategy knowledge to carry out the plan he/she has devised,
he/she can find a solution by carrying out the plan. In the step
of carrying out the plan, the students were asked to question
the given statement, perform foreseen solutions regarding the
problem, check if their solutions worked or not - or if they
were correct or not, express their reasons for proving that their
solutions were correct. In the final step, they were required to
write a new problem similar to the given problem. The imple-
mentation was performed sometimes individually and some-
times by creating a discussion environment.
An experimental group student’s solution found by using
the KWL strategy was given in Figure 5. In order to under-
stand the implementation process better, sample explana-
tions that the student made about use of the KWL strategy
in solving the problem and interpretations were included in
Table 3.
In Table 3, it was seen that the student wrote what he
knew about the topic on ‘K’ column and recalled prior
knowledge – the basis for solving the problem – from men-
tal schema. In ‘W’ column, the questions that would help
problem-solving and that are needed to be asked in the steps
of mathematical problem-solving were asked. The student
had been asked to write interrogative expressions in ‘W’ col-
umn. In ‘L’ column, the problem was solved by finding the
answers of the questions in ‘W’ column.
Data analysis
Quantitative data analysis techniques were employed in
order to reveal if there were any statistically significant dif-
ferences between problem-solving achievement pretest and
posttest scores of the students in the EG, to whom the KWL
reading strategy was applied and of the students in the CG,
Figure 2. Study of a student in the EG about the reading text “Colors Hidden in the Light”.
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 351
to whom instruction was implemented in accordance with
the current instructional program. Therefore, the questions
in the problem-solving achievement test were scored using
the progressive scoring scale by the two researchers, and
intercoder reliability was examined according to Miles and
Huberman’s (1994) formula. The intercoder reliability was
found to be 89%. For the remaining 11% difference, the two
researchers gathered to discuss and reached an agreement.
Thus, a full correspondence (100%) was achieved by increas-
ing the correspondence rate between the coders. Secondly,
SPSS Package Program was used in order to determine
whether there was a statistically significant difference
Figure 3. Study of a student in the EG about the reading text “The World is Round”.
Figure 4. The mathematical problem-solving activity performed by the EG students using the KWL strategy.
Figure 5. The mathematical problem-solving activity performed by the EG students using the KWL strategy.
352 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
between the scores of the EG and CG students. Non-para-
metric techniques were employed for data analysis since
the number of subjects in the groups was small. Mann-
Whitney U test checks if the scores obtained from two
independent samples differ significantly. This test controls
if two independent groups have similar distributions in the
population in terms of the concerned variable. U test
requires the dependent variable to be in ordinal scale, and
observations need to be independent of each other.
Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test is used to test significance of
the difference between the scores belonging to two depend-
ent measuring sets. This test is used as an alternative for t-
test in two paired groups when variables do not show nor-
mal distribution (B€uy€uk€ozt€urk, 2013). The Wilcoxon’s
Signed Rank Test for the analyses between the dependent
groups and The Mann-Whitney U Test for the analyses
between the independent groups were implemented. This
method was preferred since the data obtained from the
research were not distributed normally, and the study
group was small.
Findings
In this section of the research, the findings and interpreta-
tions were included. Firstly, the results of the test of equiva-
lency, which was conducted to determine if the groups were
equal, and descriptive analysis results were presented. Then,
the sub-problems of the research were given under sections.
Results of the test of equivalency and
descriptive analysis
The normality test results examined to compare equivalency
of the EG and CG were presented in Table 4, and t-test
results were presented in Table 5.
It was understood from Table 4 that the scores received
from the test of equivalency by the experimental and control
groups did not show normal distribution (pEG¼.116,
pCG¼.036). Thus, results of the t-test, which was used for
independent samples were given in Table 5.
Independent samples t-test result regarding the scores
received by the EG and CG students was p¼.655. As the cal-
culated p value was greater than .05, it was concluded that
there were not any significant differences between the EG
and CG before the implementation [t (33) ¼.451, p¼.655
>.05]. Thus, it can be claimed that the EG and CG were
equivalent before the implementation of the KWL read-
ing strategy.
In Table 6, pretest and posttest mean scores and standard
deviations of the control and experimental groups regarding
the problem-solving steps and overall problem-solving
achievement. It was seen that the posttest mean scores of
the control group in understanding the problem
(X ¼ 10, 41), devising a plan (X ¼ 9, 59), carrying out the
plan (X ¼ 12, 29), looking back (X ¼ 1, 35) and overall
problem-solving (X ¼ 40, 00) were higher than their pretest
mean scores in understanding the problem (X ¼ 7, 76),
devising a plan (X ¼ 3, 94), carrying out the plan
(X ¼ 6, 71), looking back (X ¼ , 88) and overall problem-
solving (X ¼ 26, 12) respectively, yet their posttest mean
scores in suggesting a problem (X ¼ 4, 71) were lower than
their pretest mean scores in the same step (X ¼ 5, 47). On
the other hand, the posttest mean scores of the experimental
group in understanding the problem (X ¼ 17, 78), devising a
plan (X ¼ 14, 06), carrying out the plan (X ¼ 12, 72), look-
ing back (X ¼ 1, 17), suggesting a problem (X ¼ 8, 28) and
overall problem-solving (X ¼ 55, 72) were higher than their
pretest mean scores in understanding the problem
(X ¼ 7, 22), devising a plan (X ¼ 3, 22), carrying out the
plan (X ¼ 5, 39), looking back (X ¼ , 83), suggesting a
Table 3. The KWL chart related to the experimental group student’s solution found by using the KWL strategy.
The KWL Chart
K-What I Know? W-What I Want? L-What I Learned?
-I know what an integral is.
- I know what a fraction is.
- I know what unit fraction is.
- I know that a fraction is each of equal
units of an integral.
- I know how to perform four basic
operations in fractions.
-How can I express the problem in my own words?
- Is there any redundant information in the
problem? If yes, what?
- Can I solve the problem with the information
given?
- How many equal parts make up the whole
class?
- What is the ratio of the boys in the class?
- What is the ratio of the girls in the class?
- Can I draw a figure illustrating all of these?
- How can I solve the problem by making use
of the figure?
- How can I find the result of the problem?
- How can I check whether I solved the
problem accurately or not?
- Can I write a new problem similar to
this one?
-I can express the problem in my own words. “If
the ratio of boys in a class is 4
10 , what is the ratio
of girls?”
- The number of students was divided into 10
equal parts.
- The boys are equal to 4
10 of the class.
- I can draw a figure to find the ratio of the
girls in the class.
- If I regard the number of all students in the
class as an integral, I can write the integral as 10
10 :
- If 4
10 of the class are boys, I can do
10
10  4
10 ¼ 6
10 to find the ratio of girls.
- The result is correct because the integral was
divided into 10 parts, and the boys made up 4 of
10 parts, and the girls made up 6 of 10 parts.
- I can write a new problem similar to this
one. I can change the numbers.
Table 4. Normality test results based on TE scores of the EG and CG.
Shapiro-Wilk
Groups Statistic df Sig
CG .883 17 .036
EG .917 18 .116
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 353
problem (X ¼ 2, 33) and overall problem-solving
(X ¼ 22, 22) respectively.
Findings and interpretations related to the first
sub-problem
The Mann-Whitney U Test was employed to determine if
there were any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement pretest scores of the EG and
CG students, and the related finding was given in Table 7.
In Table 7, the Mann-Whitney U Test results according
to the pretest scores received from the Progressive Scoring
Scale (PSS) by the EG and CG students were shown for
each step. Accordingly, no significant differences were found
between two groups as a result of U test regarding the pre-
test scores received from the steps of PSS, which were
understanding the problem (U¼ 137.500, p>.05), devising a
plan (U¼ 136.500, p>.05), carrying out the plan
(U¼ 144.500, p>.05), looking back (U¼ 99.000, p>.05) and
suggesting a problem (U¼ 144.500, p> :05). Table 7 indi-
cated that there were no significant differences between both
groups regarding their pretest sum scores in all steps of
problem-solving (U¼ 138.500, p>.05).
Findings and interpretations related to the second
sub-problem
The Mann-Whitney U Test was employed to determine if
there were any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement posttest scores of the EG and
CG students, and the related finding was given in Table 8.
In Table 8, the Mann-Whitney U Test results according
to the posttest scores received from the Progressive Scoring
Scale (PSS) by the EG and CG students were shown for
each step. Accordingly, a significant difference was found
between two groups as a result of U test regarding the postt-
est scores received from the steps of PSS, which were
understanding the problem (U¼ 17.500, p< :05), devising a
plan (U¼ 50.500, p< :05), looking back (U¼ 64.000,
p< :05) and suggesting a problem (U¼ 88.500, p< :05).
However, no significant difference was observed between the
groups in the step of carrying out the plan (U¼ 101.000,
p> :05). On the other hand, a significant difference was
found between the two groups regarding the sum of the
posttest scores received from all steps of problem-solving
achievement (U¼ 69.500, p< :05). When mean ranks were
considered, the students in the EG were found to be more
successful in each of the steps of understanding the problem,
devising a plan, looking back and suggesting a problem
compared to the ones in the CG. In addition, mean ranks
indicated that problem-solving achievement of the students
in the EG was higher than the ones in the CG according to
the analyses of overall sum scores. This finding revealed that
instruction with the KWL reading strategy was effective in
the steps of understanding the problem, devising a plan,
looking back and suggesting a problem and problem-solving
achievement.
Findings and interpretations related to the third
sub-problem
The third sub-problem “Are there any statistically significant
differences between pretest and posttest problem-solving
achievement scores of the EG students on whom the KWL
strategy was employed?” was tested with the Wilcoxon’s
Signed Rank Test. Accordingly, the Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank
Test results regarding whether there was a statistically sig-
nificant difference between each step of problem-solving and
the pretest and posttest scores received from the PSS before
and after the implementation by the EG students were pre-
sented in Table 9.
It was seen in Table 9 that there was a significant differ-
ence between the pretest and posttest scores received from
the steps of understanding the problem (z¼ 3.728, p<.05),
devising a plan (z¼ 3,724, p<.05), carrying out the plan
(z¼ 3.584, p<.05), looking back (z¼ 3.628, p<.05) and sug-
gesting a problem (z¼ 3.523, p< :05) and problem-solving
achievement (z¼ 3.724, p< .05) by the EG. Based on this
result, it was understood that instruction with the KWL
strategy developed problem-solving achievement of the EG
students. According to the results of the analysis in Table 9,
the KWL reading strategy was effective in fostering the EG
students’ achievement in each step and in problem-solving.
Findings and interpretations related to the fourth
sub-problem
The fourth sub-problem “Are there any statistically signifi-
cant differences between pretest and posttest problem-solv-
ing achievement scores of the CG students on whom
current instructional program was employed?” was tested
with the Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank Test. Accordingly, the
Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank Test results regarding whether
there was a statistically significant difference between each
step of problem-solving and the pretest and posttest scores
Table 5. T-test results based on TE scores of the EG and CG.
Groups N X ss t p
CG 17 16.35 2.370 .451 .655
EG 18 16.67 1.715
Table 6. Descriptive analysis results of the problem-solving steps.
Steps Tests
Control G
(N¼ 17)
Experimental G
(N¼ 18)
X sd X sd
Understanding the Problem Pretest 7,76 3,011 7,22 3,209
Posttest 10,41 4,611 17,78 2,756
Devising a Plan Pretest 3,94 2,989 3,22 1,987
Posttest 9,59 4,611 14,06 2,838
Carrying out the Plan Pretest 6,71 3,820 5,39 3,127
Posttest 12,29 3,721 12,72 2,947
Looking Back Pretest ,88 1,764 ,83 1,724
Posttest 1,35 2,120 1,17 1,948
Suggesting a Problem Pretest 5,47 6,848 2,33 1,749
Posttest 4,71 6,440 8,28 5,039
Problem-Solving Achievement
(Overall)
Pretest 26,12 15,252 22,22 7,674
Posttest 40,00 16,244 55,72 11,766
354 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
received from the PSS before and after the implementation
by the CG students were presented in Table 10.
Table 10 indicated that there was a significant difference
between the pretest and posttest scores received from the
steps of devising a plan (z¼ 3.305, p<.05), carrying out the
plan (z¼ 3.538, p<.05) and problem-solving achievement
(z¼ 3.724, p< .05) by the CG. However, there were not any
significant differences between their pretest and posttest
scores received from the steps of understanding the problem
(z¼ 1.866, p >.05), looking back (z¼ 3.628, p<.05) and sug-
gesting a problem (z¼ 3.523, p< :05). Based on this result,
it can be claimed that the implementation in accordance
with the current instructional program helped the students
be successful in problem-solving. Table 10 showed that there
was a significant difference between the pretest and posttest
scores of the CG students as a result of the analyses imple-
mented by converting the scores obtained from each step of
the problem-solving to the total score. On the other hand,
while the students were successful in solving mathematical
problems, they were not able to show the same success for
the steps of understanding the problem, looking back and
suggesting a problem. It can be said that the basic under-
standing of obtaining this finding was that problem-solving
achievement was considered as result-oriented. It was under-
stood from Table 10 that there were not any significant dif-
ferences between the test scores of the CG students obtained
before and after the implementation in the most important
steps of problem-solving that are understanding the
Table 7. The Mann-Whitney U pretest analysis results regarding problem-solving achievement of the EG and CG.
Problem-Solving Steps Group N X sd Mean Ranks Rank Sum U z p
Understanding the Problem CG 17 7.76 3.011 18.91 321.50 137.500 .516 .606
EG 18 7.22 3.209 17.14 308.50
Devising a Plan CG 17 3.94 2.989 18.97 322.50 136.500 .553 .580
EG 18 3.22 1.987 17.08 307.50
Carrying out the Plan CG 17 8.06 4.023 17.53 315.50 144.500 .283 .777
EG 18 7.67 4.243 18.50 314.50
Looking Back CG 17 .88 1.764 14.82 252.00 99.000 1.966 .049
EG 18 1.78 1.517 21.00 378.00
Suggesting a Problem CG 17 5.47 6.848 18.50 314.50 144.500 .285 .776
EG 18 2.33 1.749 17.53 315.50
Problem-Solving Achievement CG 17 26.12 15.252 18.85 320.50 138.500 .479 .632
EG 18 22.22 7.674 17.19 309.50
Table 8. The Mann-Whitney u posttest analysis results regarding problem-solving achievement of the EG and CG.
Problem-Solving Steps Group N X sd Mean Rank Rank Sum U z p
Understanding the Problem CG 17 10.41 4.611 10.03 170.50 17.500 4.493 .000
EG 18 17.78 2.756 25.53 459.50
Devising a Plan CG 17 9.59 4.611 11.97 203.50 50.500 3.401 .001
EG 18 14.06 2.838 23.69 426.50
Carrying out the Plan CG 17 13.94 4.451 21.06 358.00 101.000 1.722 .085
EG 18 11.33 3.956 15.11 272.00
Looking Back CG 17 1.35 2.120 12.76 217.00 64.000 3.101 .002
EG 18 4.28 2.492 22.94 413.00
Suggesting a Problem CG 17 4.71 6.440 14.21 241.50 88.500 2.155 .032
EG 18 8.28 5.039 21.58 388.50
Problem-Solving Achievement CG 17 40.00 16.244 13.09 222.50 69.500 2.758 .006
EG 18 55.72 11.766 22.64 407.50
Table 9. The Wilcoxon’s signed rank test results regarding problem-solving achievement pretest and posttest scores of the
EG Students.
Problem-Solving Steps Posttest-Pretest N Mean Rank Rank Sum z p
Understanding the Problem Negative Rank 0 .00 .00 3.732 .000
Positive Rank 18 9.50 171.00
Equal 0
Devising a Plan Negative Rank 0 .00 .00 3.737 .000
Positive Rank 18 9.50 171.00
Equal 0
Carrying out the Plan Negative Rank 3 5.67 17.00 2.447 .014
Positive Rank 12 8.58 103.00
Equal 3
Looking Back Negative Rank 0 .00 .00 3.327 .001
Positive Rank 14 7.50 105.00
Equal 4
Suggesting a Problem Negative Rank 0 .00 .00 3.523 .000
Positive Rank 16 8.50 136.00
Equal 2
Problem-Solving Achievement Negative Rank 0 .00 .00 3.724 .000
Positive Rank 18 9.50 171.00
Equal 0
Based on negative ranks.
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 355
problem, looking back and suggesting a similar problem. On
the contrary, the step of problem-solving was successfully
carried out by the students in the CG.
Discussion and conclusion
In the present study, impact of the KWL reading strategy on
problem-solving achievement of the primary school 4th
graders was investigated. It was found in this study, in
which a quasi-experimental design with pretest-posttest CG
was employed, that the KWL strategy improved the stu-
dents’ problem-solving achievement as a result of non-para-
metric tests.
Each step of the problem-solving process was separately
analyzed. Accordingly, there was a significant difference in
favor of the EG in each step of problem-solving which are
understanding the problem, devising a plan, looking back
and suggesting a problem. Considering the sum of the
scores obtained from each step, a statistically significant dif-
ference was found in problem-solving achievement of the
two groups in favor of the EG. However, no significant dif-
ference was found between the scores of the EG and CG
students in the step of carrying out the plan.
A significant difference was observed between the sum of
the scores received from each step by the EG and CG stu-
dents in favor of the former ones as a result of the within-
groups analyses. On the other hand, no significant differen-
ces were found between the pretest and posttest scores
received in the steps of understanding the problem, looking
back and suggesting a problem by the CG students when
each step was separately analyzed.
Understanding the problem is the most important step of
problem-solving. This stems from the fact that a student
who cannot understand the problem cannot choose and
carry out an appropriate strategy for solving the problem
and cannot interpret the results. The current research
revealed how important the step of understanding the prob-
lem for solving a problem is. Within-group test results indi-
cated that the results could not be appropriately interpreted
by the CG students, to whom the instruction in accordance
with the activities in the current instructional program was
administered. It cannot be claimed that the student can real-
ize solution of a problem completely in situations in which
the link between the given and the asked in a problem and
the bridge between old and new information cannot be
established. In this respect, it can be suggested that the
KWL reading strategy was effective in helping the EG stu-
dents understand the problem. The findings obtained from
the EG students indicated that the KWL reading strategy
was beneficial for solving a mathematical problem. If a stu-
dent can devise a strategy for solving a problem and can
implement this strategy upon understanding the problem by
using the KWL strategy, the problem can be solved. An
individual can produce various solutions for the problems
with appropriate reasoning according to his/her own charac-
teristics (Umay, 2003). Thus, readers need to synthesize,
interpret and evaluate information from the text and use it
if suitable (Wijaya & Puti, 2015). Finding a correct solution
depends on appropriate reasoning and understanding the
problem thoroughly because the students gather the con-
cepts and operations during problem-solving and use them
for solving the problem (Bernardo, 1999). Therefore, it can
be stated that the strategy applied to the EG students con-
tributed positively to the students’ problem-solving achieve-
ments considering that the steps trigger each other. Several
studies whose results are similar to the result obtained in
the step of understanding the problem in the current study
(Prakitipong & Nakamura, 2006; Tertemiz, 1994; Hegarty
et al., 1995, Panasuk and Beyranevand, 2010, as cited by Ulu
et al., 2016; Ilg?n & Arslan, 2012) have been conducted. In
addition, Fuentes’s (1998) view that reading comprehension
strategies can be used to understand the problem story due
to the similarities between understanding the story and
understanding the word problems has supported the result
of the current study in the step of understanding
the problem.
Another result of this study was that there were not any
significant differences between the scores of the two groups
received in the step of carrying out the plan - that is solving
the problem. The reason of this situation may be that the
Table 10. The Wilcoxon’s signed rank test results regarding problem-solving achievement pretest and posttest scores of the
CG Students.
Problem-Solving Steps Posttest-Pretest N Mean Rank Rank Sum Z p
Understanding the Problem Negative Rank 6 5.33 32.00 1.866 .062
Positive Rank 10 10.40 104.00
Equal 1
Devising a Plan Negative Rank 0 .00 .00 3.305 .001
Positive Rank 14 7.50 105.00
Equal 3
Carrying out the Plan Negative Rank 1 2.00 2.00 3.538 .000
Positive Rank 16 9.44 151.00
Equal 0
Looking Back Negative Rank 2 4.50 9.00 -.904 .366
Positive Rank 5 3.80 19.00
Equal 10
Suggesting a Problem Negative Rank 7 6.00 42.00 -.803 .422
Positive Rank 4 6.00 24.00
Equal 6
Problem-Solving Achievement Negative Rank 3 3.00 9.00
Positive Rank 14 10.29 144.00 3.198 .001
Equal 0
Based on negative ranks.
356 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
students did not know the ways of problem-solving.
However, the results of the Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test
analysis which was conducted for the dependent groups
revealed that there was a significant difference in the step of
solving the problem. In other words, the students in both
groups reached the result by solving the problems with the
mathematical activities given. Another reason of this case
was that the students may have had usual thoughts toward
learning mathematics. This can be explained as follows.
Despite the improvement studies in the curriculums con-
ducted in Turkey from time to time, it is not realistic to
expect important and sudden changes as a result of these
improvements and a certain amount of time is necessary
(Baki, 2014). It was observed that carrying out the plan, that
is the solution of the problem, was generally carried out in
the CG compared to the other steps of the problem-solving
process. However, no statistically significant difference was
found between the two groups. This may stem from the fact
that the students just tried to find the numerical result of
the problem without using mental skills such as collecting
the necessary data for the solution by analyzing a problem
thoroughly, deciding whether the solution is logical and
adapting the problem to similar situations. This is because
of the fact that the students generally regard mathematics as
a structure consisting of formulas and rules and needed to
be memorized. The students with such a thought adopt their
teacher’s solution by using his/her mathematics and algo-
rithms. A student who is not able to produce his/her own
solution and own mathematics has difficulty in solving the
problem as he/she cannot transfer his/her superficial know-
ledge to different situations. Although our schools try to
teach conceptual knowledge, functional knowledge is
focused more (Baki, 2014). This leads students to be able to
solve the problems they already know or have encountered
before. In the current study, the reason of nonexistence of a
statistically significant difference between the two groups in
the step of carrying out the plan may be considered in
this context.
Similarly, the EG students were more successful than the
CG students in the step of suggesting a problem. With the
help of the KWL strategy employed in the EG, the students
were able to analyze the problems thoroughly and to trans-
fer them mostly to similar situations. The analysis of the
data obtained from the step of suggesting a problem indi-
cated that there was a significant difference in favor of
the EG.
Considering the results of the current study in general,
the results of the current study are similar to the results of
the studies carried out by Hite (2009), Nicolas and Emata
(2018), €Ozdemir and Serts€oz (2006), €Ozt€urk et al. (2020),
Prakitipong and Nakamura (2006), Vilenius-Tuohimaa
et al. (2008).
In the current study, the KWL strategy helped the stu-
dents solve the problems by recalling their knowledge famil-
iar with the problems via a KWL chart, determining what
they wanted to learn and linking this knowledge with the
knowledge they wanted to learn. Nicely’s (2015) statement
that the KWL chart is a reflective table indicating what
students know, what they want to learn and what they
learned can be shown as evidence fort his sentence. In add-
ition, with the use of the KWL strategy, students can con-
centrate on analytical reading (Siribunnam & Tayraukham,
2009) and actively link the old and new knowledge
(Ibrahim, 2012). Students are encouraged to take over
responsibility with brainstorming in the classroom and to
expand their ideas and perceptions about the topic (Szabo,
2006). In the current study, it can be stated that the KWL
strategy led the students to think, reason and question in
the process of problem-solving because the problem-solving
process includes the processes of active questioning and
thinking (Schoenfeld, 1985). In the present study, specifically
impact of the KWL reading strategy on the students’ prob-
lem-solving achievement was investigated. It can be indi-
cated that the results of the current study are similar to the
results of the studies revealing that reading comprehension
has a positive effect on mathematics achievement and math-
ematical problem-solving achievement (G€oktas?, 2010;
Lerkkanen et al., 2005; Nicely, 2015; Pape, 2004; Passolunghi
& Pazzaglia, 2005; Phromphithak, 2015; Vilenius-Tuohimaa
et al., 2008).
Ulu et al. (2016) concluded that instruction of reading
comprehension and problem-solving strategies raised the 5th
graders’ problem-solving achievement. On the other hand,
Ulu et al. (2016) claimed that reading comprehension strat-
egies could explain just 7,86% of the change in problem-
solving achievement, and students’ readiness level were
more influential in predicting problem-solving achievement
than their reading comprehension strategies. Thus, it cannot
be asserted that the results of the current study conform
with the results of the study carried out by Ulu et al. (2016).
The current study employed quantitative methods to
examine the problem-solving achievements of the primary
school 4th graders, each step of which was analyzed separ-
ately, with the KWL reading strategy. A qualitative study
can be carried out in order to obtain in-depth information
about reasons of these results. In addition, mixed studies in
which factors affecting the problem-solving skill by using
different reading strategies at different grade levels are
employed can be conducted.
ORCID
Muamber Y?lmaz http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1736-7717
References
Akily, S. (2010). The impact of the use of meta-knowledge strategies in
the teaching of science on achievement and knowledge skills and
towards the subject of blind students. Journal. of Studies in
Curriculum and Instruction, 154, 26–66.
Aky€uz, V. (2004). The effects of textbook style and reading strategy on
students’ achievement and attitudes towards heat and temperature.
(Yay?nlanmam?s? y€uksek lisans tezi). Orta Dogu Teknik €Universitesi.
Alacaci, C. (2010). €Ogrencilerin kesirler konusundaki kavram
yan?lg?lar?. In E. Bing€olbali & M. F. €Ozmantar (Ed.), _Ilk€ogretimde
kars??las??lan matematiksel zorluklar ve c?€oz€um €onerileri (2. Bask?, pp.
63–95). Pegem Akademi Yay?nc?l?k.
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 357
Aloqaili, A. S. (2012). The relationship between reading comprehension
and critical thinking: A theoretical study. Journal of King Saud
University - Languages and Translation, 24(1), 35–41. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jksult.2011.01.001
Alsalhi, N. R. (2020). The effects of the use of the Know-Want-Learn
Strategy (KWL) on fourth grade students’ achievement in science at
primary stage and their attitudes towards it. EURASIA Journal of
Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 16(4), 1–14. https://
doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/115165
Alyousef, H. S. (2005). Teaching reading comprehension to ESL/EFL
learners. The Reading Matrix, 5(2), 143–154.
Baki, A. (2014). Mathematics education from theory to practice. Letter
Education Publishing.
Baki, A. (2018). Knowledge of teaching math. Ankara: Pegem
Akademi.
Barton, M. L., & Heidema, C. (2002). Teaching reading in mathematics,
a supplement to teaching reading in the content areas teacher’s man-
ual: If not me, then who? (2nd ed.). McREL (Mid-continent
Research for Education and Learning).
Baykul, Y. (2014). Ortaokulda matematik €ogretimi (5–8. S?n?flar).
Pegem Akademi Yay?nc?l?k.
Baykul, Y. (2016). _Ilkokulda matematik €ogretimi (13. bask?). Pegem
Akademi Yay?nc?l?k.
Bernardo, A. B. (1999). Overcoming obstacles in understanding and
solving word problems in mathematics. Educational Psychology, 19
(2), 149–163. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144341990190203
Biber, A. C?., Tuna, A., & Aktas?, O. (2013). €Ogrencilerin kesirler konu-
sundaki kavram yan?lg?lar? ve bu yan?lg?lar?n kesir problemleri
c?€oz€umlerine etkisi. Trakya €Universitesi Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 3(2),
152–162.
Boonen, A. J., de Koning, B. B., Jolles, J., & van der Schoot, M. (2016).
Word problem solving in contemporary math education: A plea for
reading comprehension skills training. Frontiers in Psychology, 7(7),
1–10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00191
B€uy€uk€ozt€urk, S?. (2011). Deneysel desenler €ontest- sontest kontrol grubu
desen ve veri analizi. Pegem Akademi Yay?nlar?.
B€uy€uk€ozt€urk, S?. (2013). Sosyal bilimler ic?in veri analizi el kitab?
(6.bask?). Pegem Akademi Yay?nlar?.
Carr, E., & Ogle, D. (1987). K-W-L plus: A strategy for comprehension
and summarization. Journal of Reading, 30, 626–631.
Charles, R. (1985). The role of problem solving. Arithmetic Teacher, 32,
48–50.
C?avus?oglu, E. (2010). The research on the relation between reading com-
prehension level and math problem solving achievement of 5th grade
students [Unpublished master’s thesis]. Gazi University.
Eker, C. (2015). €Oz d€uzenleme becerilerinin €ogretimi s€urecinde KWL
(bil-iste-€ogren) stratejisinin etkisi. Akademik Bak?s? Dergisi, 51,
168–182.
Epc?ac?an, C. (2009). Okudugunu anlama stratejilerine genel bir bak?s?.
Uluslararas? Sosyal Aras?t?rmalar Dergisi, 2(6), 207–223.
Erdem, E. (2016). Relationship between mathematical reasoning and
reading comprehension: The case of the 8 th grade. Necatibey
Faculty of Education Electronic Journal of Science and Mathematics
Education, 10(1), 393–414.
Fuents, P. (1998). Reading comprehension in mathematics. The
Clearing House: A Journal of Educational Strategies, 72(2), 81–88.
Gammill, D. M. (2006). Learning to write way. The Reading Teacher,
59(8), 754–762. https://doi.org/10.1598/RT.59.8.3
G€oktas?, €O. (2010). Okudugunu anlama becerisinin ilk€ogretim ikinci
kademe matematik dersindeki akademik bas?ar?ya etkisi.
Yay?nlanmam?s? y€uksek lisans tezi. _In€on€u €Universitesi Egitim
Bilimleri Enstit€us€u, Malatya.
Gonzales, N. A. (1998). A blueprint for problem posing. School Science
and Mathematics, 98(8), 448–456. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1949-
8594.1998.tb17437.x
Grimm, K. J. (2008). Longitudinal associations between reading and
mathematics. Developmental Neuropsychology, 33(3), 410–426.
https://doi.org/10.1080/87565640801982486
G€unes?, F. (2000). Okuma yazma €ogretimi ve beyin teknolojisi. Ocak
Yay?nlar?.
G€ung€or, H. (2014). _Ilkokul 4. s?n?f matematik dersi kesirler konusunun
€ogretiminde €ogretmen yard?mc? kitap kullan?m?n?n €ogrenci bas?ar?s?
€uzerindeki etkisi [Yay?nlanmam?s? y€uksek lisans tezi]. Y€uz€unc€u Y?l
€Universitesi Egitim Bilimleri Enstit€us€u, Van.
Hana, A. M., & Faridi, A. (2015). The effectiveness of gist (generating
interactions between schemata and text) and kwl (know, want, and
learned) strategies to improve reading achievement of male and
female students. English Education Journal, 5(2), 41–45.
Hegarty, M., Mayer, R. E., & Monk, C. A. (1995). comprehension of
arithmetic word problems: A comparison of succcessful and unsuc-
cessful problem solvers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(1),
18–32. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.87.1.18
Heidema, C. (2009, February). Reading and writing to learn in math-
ematics: Strategies to improve problem solving. Adolescent Literacy
in Perspective, 2–9. www.ohiorc.org/adlit/
Hill, B. C., Rubtic, C., & Norwick, L. (1998). Classroom based asses-
ment. Christopher-Gordon Publishers, Inc.
Hite, S. (2009). Improving problem solving by improving reading skills
[Mat in The Middle Institute Pratnership Summative Projects for
MA Degree]. University of Nebraska-Lincoln. https://digitalcom-
mons.unl.edu/mathmidsummative/9
Ibrahim, N. N. (2012). The use of KWL technique in teaching reading
descriptive text: A quasi-experimental study in the first grade of a
senior high school in Bandung. Retrieved May 21, 2020, from http://
aresearch.upi.edu/operator/upload/s_ing_0608702_chapter3.pdf
Ilg?n, H., & Arslan, D. (2012). T€urkc?e dersinde metinlerle problem
c?€ozme €ogretiminin €ogrencilerin problem c?€ozme becerilerine etkisi.
Ahi Evran €Universitesi K?rs?ehir Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 13(2),
157–176.
K?l?c?, C?. (2009). Representations the fifth grade primary school students
used in the process of solving mathematical problems [Unpublished
master’s thesis]. Anadolu University.
Knopik, V. S., & DeFries, J. C. (1999). Etiology of covariation between
reading and mathematics performance: A twin study. Twin
Research, 2(3), 226–234. https://doi.org/10.1375/twin.2.3.226
Knuth, E. J. (2002). Secondary school mathematics teachers’ concep-
tions of proof. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 33(5),
379–405.
Kocaoglu, T., & Yenilmez, K. (2015). Bes?inci s?n?f €ogrencilerinin kesir
problemlerinde yapt?klar? hatalar ve kavram yan?lg?lar?. Dicle
€Universitesi Ziya G€okalp Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 14(24), 294–285.
https://doi.org/10.14582/DUZGEF.520
Kula, F., & €Oren Vural, D. (2019). Matematik €ogretiminde €ornekler:
Temel tan?m, kavram ve yaklas??mlar. Abant _Izzet Baysal €Universitesi
Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 19(2), 569–586. https://doi.org/10.17240/
aibuefd.2019.19.46660-427934
Lazic, B., Abramovich, S., Mrda, M., & Romano, D. A. (2017). On the
teaching and learning of fractions through a conceptual generaliza-
tion approach. International Electronic Journal of Mathematics
Education, 12(3), 749–767.
Lerkkanen, M. K., Rasku-Puttonen, H., Aunola, K., & Nurmi, J. E.
(2005). Mathematical performance predicts progress in reading com-
prehension among 7-years olds. European Journal of Psychology of
Education, 20(2), 121–137. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03173503
Lou, Y., Wu, L., Liu, H., & Chen, L. (2016). Improving non-english-
majored college students’ writing skills: combining a know-want-
learn plus model of meta-cognitive writing strategy instruction and
internet-based language laboratory support. Open Journal of Social
Sciences, 04(08), 37–44. https://doi.org/10.4236/jss.2016.48005
Meydan, H. (2018). Anlaml? €ogrenme €oz-fark?ndal?k €olc?eginin gel-
is?tirilmesi. Degerler Egitimi Dergisi, 16(36), 95–118. https://dergi-
park.org.tr/tr/pub/ded/issue/41920/505380
MoNE. (2013). Ortaokul matematik dersi 5, 6, 7 ve 8. siniflar €ogretim
program?. Talim ve Terbiye Kurulu Bas?kanl?g?.
MoNE. (2018). Matematik dersi €ogretim program? (ilkokul ve ortaokul
1,2,3,4,5,6,7 ve 8. s?n?flar). Talim Terbiye kurulu Bas?kanl?g?.
Misquitta, R. (2011). A review of the literature: fraction instruction for
struggling learners in mathematics. Learning Disabilities Research &
Practice, 26(2), 109–119. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5826.2011.
00330.x
358 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). (1989).
Curriculum and evaluation standarts for school mathematics. Author.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). (2000).
Principles and standards for school mathematics. Author.
Nicely, D. A. (2015). Problem-solving and reading strategies for ACTVR
preparation. Ohio Journal of School Mathematics, 72, 8–12.
Nicolas, C. A. T., & Emata, C. Y. (2018). An integrative approach
through reading comprehension to enhance problem-solving skills
of grade 7 mathematics students. International Journal of Innovation
in Science and Mathematics Education, 26(3), 40–64.
Ogle, D. (1986). The K-W-L: A teaching model that develops active
reading of expository text. The Reading Teacher, 39(6), 564–570.
https://doi.org/10.1598/RT.39.6.11
Okur, M., & C?akmak G€urel, Z. (2016). 6th and 7th grade secondary
school students’ misconceptions about fractions. Erzincan
€Universitesi Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 18(2), 922–952. https://doi.org/
10.17556/jef.30116
€Ozcan, G. (2007). Problem c?€ozme y€onteminin eles?tirel d€us?€unme ve eri-
s?iye etkisi. (Yay?nlanmam?s? doktora tezi). Abant Izzet Baysal
University Graduate School of Social Sciences, 14(14), 173–173.
https://doi.org/10.11616/AbantSbe.212
€Ozc?elik, U. (2018). _Ilkokul matematik 4 ders kitabi. Ata Yay?nc?l?k.
€Ozdemir, A. S?., & Serts€oz, T. (2006). Okudugunu anlama davran?s??n?n
kazand?r?lmas?n?n matematik bas?ar?s?na etkisi. M. €U. Atat€urk Egitim
Fak€ultesi Egitim Bilimleri Dergisi, 23, 237–257.
€Ozden, Y. (2009). €Ogrenme ve €ogretme. Ankara: Pegem Akademi.
€Ozt€urk, M., Akkan, Y., & Kaplan, A. (2020). Reading comprehension,
Mathematics self-efficacy perception, and Mathematics attitude as
correlates of students’ non-routine Mathematics problem-solving
skills in Turkey. International Journal of Mathematical Education in
Science and Technology, 51(7), 1042–1058. https://doi.org/10.1080/
0020739X.2019.1648893
€Ozy?ld?r?m G€um€us?, F., & Umay, A. (2018). Problem c?€oz€um€une kav-
ramsal/is?lemsel yaklas??m €olc?eginin gelis?tirilmesi. Abant _Izzet Baysal
€Universitesi Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 18 (1), 375–391.
€Ozy?lmaz, G., & Alc?, B. (2011). _Ilk€ogretim 7. s?n?f €ogrencilerine oku-
dugunu anlama stratejilerinin €ogretiminin okudugunu anlama
bas?ar?s? €uzerine etkisi. Kuramsal Egitimbilim Dergisi, 4(1), 71–94.
Pape, S. J. (2004). Middle school children’s problem-solving behavior:
A cognitive analysis from a reading comprehension perspective.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 35(3), 187–219.
https://doi.org/10.2307/30034912
Passolunghi, M. C., & Pazzaglia, F. (2005). A comparison of updating
processes in children good or poor in arithmetic word problem-
solving. Learning and Individual Differences, 15(4), 257–269. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2005.03.001
Pek€oz, B. N. (2018). _Ilk€ogretim (1–5) T€urkc?e kitaplar?nda ortak sorun-
lar ve uygulamal? €oneriler. Ulusal Egitim Akademisi Dergisi, 2(1),
79–91.
Pesen, C. (2007). €Ogrencilerin kesirlerle ilgili kavram yan?lg?lar?. Egitim
ve Bilim, 32(143), 79–88.
Pesen, C. (2008). Kesirlerin say? dogrusu €uzerindeki g€osteriminde
€ogrencilerin €ogrenme g€uc?l€ukleri ve kavram yan?lg?lar?. _In€on€u
€Universitesi Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 9(15), 157–168.
Phromphithak, C. (2015, March). The effect of using know-want-learn
strategy on students’ achievement and attitude in learning mathem-
atics of 10 th grade students. The International Conference on
Language, Education, Humanities & Innovation (ICLEHI), 40,
99–104.
Polya, G. (1962). Mathematical discovery: On understanding, teaching,
and learning problem solving. John Wiley.
Polya, G. (1973). How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical method.
Princeton University Press.
Posamentier, A. S., & Krulik, S. (2016). Matematikte problem c?€ozme
3–6. s?n?flar ic?in kavramay? derinles?tirecek g€uc?l€u stratejiler. (L.
Akg€un, T. Kar, & M. F. €Oc?al, C?ev.). Pegem Akademi Yay?nc?l?k.
Prakitipong, N., & Nakamura, S. (2006). Analysis of mathematics per-
formance of grade 5 students in thailand using newman procedure.
Journal of International Cooperation in Education, 9(1), 111–122.
Rahayuningsih, P. D., & Wulandari, E. (2014). The use of know, want
to know, learned (kwl) technique to ?mprove teaching and learning
process. Jurnal Pendidikan Edutama, 1(2), 42–50.
Riswanto, Risnawati, & Lismayanti, D. (2014). The effect of using KWL
(know, want, learned) strategy on EFL students’ reading comprehen-
sion achievement. International Journal of Humanities and Social
Science, 4(7), 225–233.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. Academic
Press.
Shelly, A. C., Bridwell, B., Hyder, L., Ledford, N., & Patterson, P.
(1997). Revisiting the K-W-L: What we knew; What we wanted to
know; What we Learned. Reading Horizons: A Journal of Literacy
and Language Arts, 37(3), 233–242. https://scholarworks.wmich.
edu/reading_horizons/vol37/iss3/5
Silver, E. A. (1994). On mathematical problem posing. For the Learning
of Mathematics, 14(1), 19–28.
Silver, E. A., & Cai, J. (1996). An analysis of arithmetic problem posing
by middle school. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
27(5), 521–539. https://doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.27.5.0521
Siribunnam, R., & Tayraukham, S. (2009). Effects of 7-E, K.W.L and
conventional instruction on analytical thinking, learning achieve-
ment and attitudes toward chemistry learning. Journal of Social
Sciences, 5(4), 279–282. https://doi.org/10.3844/jssp.2009.279.282
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). The development of students’
understanding of the numerical value of fractions. Learning and
Instruction, 14(5), 503–518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.
2004.06.015
Szabo, S. (2006). KWHL: a student-driven evolution of the KWL.
American Secondary Education, 34(3), 57–67.
Tas?k?n, D., & Y?ld?z, C. (2011, Nisan). Kesirlerde toplama ve c??karma
is?lemlerinin €ogretiminde common knowledge construction modele
uygun materyal gelis?tirme. 2. International Conference on New
Trends in Education and Their Implications kongresinde sunulan
s€ozl€u bildiri, Antalya, Turkey.
Tas?l?dere, E., & Ery?lmaz, A. (2012). The relative effectiveness of inte-
grated reading study strategy and conceptual physcis approach.
Research in Science Education, 42(2), 181–199.
Tertemiz, N. (1994). Factors affecting elementary students’ arithmetical
problem solving ability [Unpublished doctoral dissertation].
Hacettepe University.
Tokg€oz, S. (2019). Kwl (ne biliyorum? ne €ogrenmek istiyorum? ne
€ogrendim?) stratejisinin ilkokul 3. s?n?f €ogrencilerinin okudugunu
anlama bas?ar?lar?na etkisi [Yay?nlanmam?s? y€uksek lisans tezi].
Bart?n €Universitesi, Egitim Bilimleri Enstit€us€u.
Ulu, M., Tertemiz, N., & Peker, M. (2016). Okudugunu anlama ve
problem c?€ozme stratejileri egitiminin ilk€ogretim 5. s?n?f
€ogrencilerinin rutin olmayan problem c?€ozme bas?ar?s?na etkisi. Afyon
Kocatepe €Universitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 18(2), 303–340. https://
doi.org/10.5578/jss.37331
Ulu, M. (2016). A structural equation model to explain the effect of
fluent reading, literal comprehension and inferential comprehension
levels of elementary school 4th grade students on success in problem
solving. Education and Science, 41(186), 93–117. https://doi.org/10.
15390/EB.2016.630
Ulu, M. (2017). The effect of reading comprehension and problem
solving strategies on classifying elementary 4th grade students with
high and low problem solving success. Journal of Education and
Training Studies, 5(6), 44–63. https://doi.org/10.11114/jets.v5i6.2391
Umay, A. (2003). Matematiksel muhakeme yetenegi. Hacettepe
€Universitesi Egitim Fak€ultesi Dergisi, 24(24), 234–243.
Uzun, C. (2010). Elementary student’s mathematical problem solving
successes’s analyse by demographic variables and reading comprehen-
sion skills [Unpublished master’s thesis]. Us?ak University.
Vamvakoussi, X., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). Understanding the structure
of the set of rational numbers: a conceptual change approach.
Learning and Instruction, 14(5), 453–467. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
learninstruc.2004.06.013
Van De Walle, J. A., Karp, K. S., & Bay-Williams, J. M. (2013). _Ilkokul
ve ortaokul matematigi gelis?imsel yaklas??mla €ogretim. (Soner
Durmus?, Ed. & C?ev.). Nobel Akademik Yay?nc?l?k.
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 359
Vilenius-Tuohimaa, P. M. V., Aunola, B., & Nurmi, J. (2008). The
association between mathematical word problems and reading com-
prehension. Educational Psychology, 28(4), 409–426.
Wijaya, H., Puti, H. P. (2015, June). Using KWL strategy to improve
the reading comprehension skills on hortatory exposition texts. The
12th JETA International Conference in Collaboration with English
Education Department University of Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta,
1–12.
Yazgan, Y., & Arslan, C?. (2017). Matematiksel s?rad?s?? problem c?€ozme
stratejileri ve €ornekleri (4. bask?). Pegem Akademi Yay?nc?l?k.
Y?lmaz, M. (2019a). Okuma egitimi. In M. Y?lmaz (Ed.), Yeni gelis?meler
?s??g?nda T€urkc?e €ogretimi ic?inde. (pp. 81–112). Pegem Akademi Yay?nlar?.
Y?lmaz, M. (2019b). Okuma g€uc?l€ug€u ve tedavisi. Gece Akademi
Yay?nlar?.
Y?lmaz, M. (2008). T€urkc?e’de okudugunu anlama becerilerini gelis?tirme
yollar?. Mustafa Kemal €Universitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstit€us€u Dergisi,
5(9), 131–139.
Zouhor, Z., Bogdanovic, I., & Segedinac, M. (2016). Effects of the know-
want-learn strategy on primary school students’metacognition and phys-
ics achievement. Journal of Subject Didactics, 1(1), 39–49.
360 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
Appendix 1
Test of Equivalency
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 361
362 N. USTA AND M. YILMAZ
Appendix 2
Problem-Solving Achievement Test (PSAT) (Pretest-Posttest)
1. I have 20 liras of pocket money. I bought a pen with 1/5 of my
pocket money and a movie ticket with 2/5 of it. How many liras
did I spend on my pocket money?
2. My mother read 3/8 of a 400-page book. How many pages are left
to be read?
3. Ms. Sevgi has planted three kinds of fruit seedlings in her garden.
2/4 of the seedlings are blueberries, 1/4 of strawberries and the
rest are raspberries. If Ms. Sevgi has planted 10 raspberries, how
many fruits has she planted in total?
4. My mother baked a cake. I ate 2/4 of it while my brother ate 1/4
of it. What fraction of the total cake did I and my brother eat?
5. Ahmet and Mehmet did business together. While sharing the
money they earned; Ahmet said to Mehmet, “I will take 1/4 of the
money, and you will 1/5”. Mehmet said, “No, no, I’ll take 1/4 of
you, and you will take 1/5 of it.” said. While Ahmet and Mehmet
were talking in this way, their friends Hasan came. He tried to
calm them by telling them “Dear friends, why are you arguing?
You will both buy three pieces, so you’ll get the same amount,
heal the breach!” Is Hasan right? Who wants to get more money?
6. Uncle Ahmet has an open area that he wants to divide into differ-
ent compartments. He reserves half of this area for three horses.
2/3 of the remaining area is marked for free movement of turkeys.
The remaining area is fallowed for this summer. How much of
this open area is fallowed?
7. If we serve three cakes, 3/5 of one cake per plate, how many
plates do we need to serve the total cake?
8. Kezban sleeps on 5/12 of the day and works on 2/24. How many
hours did Kezban sleep and how many hours did she study dur-
ing one day?
9. My mother is 27 and my father is 30 years old. My age is equal to
2/19 of the total age of my parents. How old do you think I am? I
would be happy if you explain your answer.
The questions of the Problem-Solving Achievement Test should
be answered according to the following instructions.
a. Express the problem in your own words.
b. What are given in this problem? What are asked?
c. Explain how you are going to solve this problem.
d. Solve this problem.
e. Check the result you have found. Is it correct? If not, what mis-
takes have you made? Explain your answer.
f. Write a similar problem and solve it.
Appendix 3
Progressive Scoring Scale
Problem
A Understanding the Problem
3 Understanding the problem entirely
2 Understanding some points of the problem
1 Being not able to understand the problem
0 Not showing any efforts to understand the problem
B Devising a Plan (Choosing a Strategy)
3 Choosing a strategy that can lead to an appropriate solution
2 Choosing only one part of strategy that can help solution
1 Choosing an inappropriate strategy
0 Not choosing any strategies
C Carrying Out the Plan
3 Finding suitable and correct solution
2 Finding a solution which is partly correct
1 Finding a solution which is inappropriate and incorrect
0 Not being able to find any solutions
D Looking Back
3 Solving the problem and newly created problem based on it
2 Verifying the results reasonably
1 Verifying the results partially
0 Not knowing how to verify the results
E Suggesting a Problem
3 The problem created is reasonable and solvable
2 A new problem has been created by changing values of the problem
1 The problem created is unreasonable and unsolvable
0 The same or new problem has not been suggested
THE JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 363
