Title:
Impact of the KWL reading strategy on
mathematical problem-solving achievement of
primary school 4th graders

Abstract:
In this study, it was aimed to investigate possible impact of using the KWL reading strategy in
teaching the topic of “fractions and operations with fractions” to the 4th graders on students’
problem-solving achievement. A quasi-experimental design with pretest-posttest control group
(CG) was employed in the study. The study group consisted of 35 4th graders studying at a pri-
mary school in Bart?n, Turkey. In the research, an experimental group (EG) and a control group
(CG) were used. There were 18 students in the experimental group (EG) and 17 students in the
control group (CG). The test of equivalency (TE), Problem-Solving Achievement Test (PSAT) to
gauge effect of instruction with the KWL strategy and reading texts were employed as data collec-
tion tools. The Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test and Mann Whitney U Test were employed in the
research. It was found as a result of the research that the KWL strategy fostered the students’
problem-solving achievement. However, there were no significant differences between the EG and
CG in terms of the scores received in the step of implementing the plan.

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

Our age necessitates the development of individuals’ mental
skills such as understanding, sorting, classifying, questioning,
associating, predicting, analyzing, synthesizing and evaluat-
ing. Besides, raising individuals who are critical and creative
thinkers, who are entrepreneurs, who can express them-
selves, who can communicate and who have advanced prob-
lem-solving skills is among educational policies of every
country. In recent years, various approaches have been pro-
posed for curriculums in Turkey, and improvements have
been made from time to time. In this context (Ministry of
National Education (MoNE), MoNE, MoNE, 2013; MoNE,
2018), the skills required to be acquired in mathematics cur-
riculum include communication, reasoning, association,
using information and communication technologies and
problem-solving. As at all levels of education, it is aimed to
develop problem-solving skills in primary education
(Baykul, 2014).
Aim of this study was to examine impact of the KWL
reading strategy on primary school 4th graders’ problem-
solving achievement.
Theoretical framework
Constructivism, which is a philosophical approach that
explains how individuals learn and understand, asserts the
idea that knowledge is not explored but interpreted, is not
revealed but created, that is, knowledge is constructed by
individuals. Knowledge is shaped as a result of one’s own
experiences, observations, interpretations and logical think-
ing (O€zden, 2009). Piaget, one of the pioneers of the con-
structivist approach, explained knowledge construction as a
result of the active interaction of the individual with his
environment through successive processes called accommo-
dation and assimilation (Baki, 2014). According to the con-
structivist approach, learning is defined as “the process of
constructing meaning by connecting new knowledge with
old knowledge and experience”. The learner constructs his/
her own conceptualization and solutions of problems. This
approach acknowledges that students learn new knowledge
by adapting the information they have already learned to
their subjective situations (O€zden, 2009). In this context,
constructivism is based on Ausubel’s “Meaningful Learning
Theory”. According to Ausubel, for a meaningful learning,
the individual should have the correct prior knowledge
about the subject to be learned and be willing and deter-
mined to learn, as well as associating the new knowledge
and the prior knowledge (Asubel, 2000, as cited by
Meydan, 2018).
According to NCTM (2000), pupils should learn math-
ematics by understanding it and actively construct new
knowledge by making use of their prior knowledge and
experiences. Principles and Standards for School
Mathematics’s (2000) learning principle is based on two
basic thoughts the first of which is learning mathematics by
understanding it. Today’s mathematics requires not only
computational skills, but also the ability to reason and think
in order to solve new problems, and to learn new ideas that
students will encounter in the future. The second is that
students can learn mathematics by understanding. Learning
is developed in classrooms so that students can evaluate
their own and others’ ideas, and they are encouraged to gen-
erate and test mathematical assumptions and to develop rea-
soning skills (as cited by Van De Walle et al., 2013).
Mathematics is commonly regarded as a difficult subject
to be understood by students. To learn mathematics, firstly
it should be understood. For this, it is significant for a stu-
dent to understand what he/she reads and make out it.
There are some basic principles that should be taken into
account in addition to reading comprehension for under-
standing mathematics. One of them is concept teaching. It is
impossible for students to learn mathematics without under-
standing concepts. Understanding a concept is associating it
with existing concepts. The more a concept is associated
with the concepts it is related to, the better it is understood.
Learning mathematics requires establishing a relationship
between conceptual knowledge and operational knowledge
(Baykul, 2014). The development of mathematical thinking
depends on the conceptualization of mathematical know-
ledge and its use when necessary. Good knowledge of math-
ematical concepts facilitates to find unique solutions to new
problems that have not been encountered before (O€zy?ld?r?m
Gu€m€s? & Umay, 2018). Mathematical models, various
proofing methods, and examples from mathematics itself
and from daily life can be used to understand mathematics.
Examples used in accordance with various teaching objec-
tives enrich and strengthen learning (Kula & O€ren Vural,
2019). In addition, the concept of proof can be used as a
tool in understanding the concepts and the relationship
between the concepts (Knuth, 2002). On the other hand, in
the process of problem- solving, the student can get the
opportunity to see the implementation of mathematical con-
cepts and connect the concepts with the method of oper-
ation, algorithm and equation to be used for the solution
(Schoen & Charles, 2003, as cited by Baki, 2018). In the pro-
cess of problem-solving, the individual has to use his exist-
ing knowledge actively. In particular, it is necessary to use
conceptual and operational knowledge in association. For
students, learning mathematics is possible by connecting the
prior knowledge with new knowledge. When this does not
occur, it may not be possible to understand and learn math-
ematics. (Hiebert & Carpenter, 1992, as cited by Ozy?ld?r?m
Gu€mu€s? & Umay, 2018).
According to Charles (1985), for solving a problem, the
student goes through cognitive processes such as under-
standing the problem sentence, selecting the necessary data
for solution, generating a solution to the problem, and
deciding whether the solution is logical or not. In this pro-
cess, the student gathers concepts and processes and applies
them to solve the problem (Bernardo, 1999, as cited by Baki,
2018). In the process of problem-solving, the student
becomes aware of his/her knowledge, investigates for solu-
tions to the problem by using his/her prior knowledge,
makes predictions and evaluates his/her solutions. In this
situation, the student uses his/her existing knowledge while
investigating for solutions to the problem, explains, analyzes,
organizes and makes sense of all information (Baki, 2018).
The development of mathematical thinking depends on
the development of mathematical skills. Problem-solving is
an important mathematical skill, too. Understanding the
problem, generating a strategy for solution, implementing
the strategy, evaluating solutions and writing a similar prob-
lem are the steps included in this process. Understanding
the problem is the most important step of problem-solving
process. If a problem cannot be identified, a solution cannot
be suggested and the problem cannot be solved. In the step
of understanding the problem, the most important critical
behaviors are to write down the things given and asked in
the problem, to explain the problem with the students’ own
expressions and to draw a figure or diagram explaining the
problem (Baykul, 2016). It is highly critical for students to
understand what they read and to explain the problem in
their own words at this step.
Not understanding the problem properly causes students
to have problems. Stating the problem in the students’ own
words and reading it as required are two important sub-
steps in understanding the problem (Baykul, 2016).
According to Ogle (1986), since the KWL reading strategy
includes activities related to determination of the students’
prior knowledge about the text to be read, what they know
and what they want to know, the student will be able to
connect the old knowledge with the new one. According to
Stephens and Brown (2000), for a student to connect the
knowledge before the reading process with the information
obtained after reading enables him/her to organize, integrate
and summarize (as cited by Ulu et al., 2016). For this rea-
son, based on the expressions of Ogle (1986) and Stephens
and Brown (2000), the idea that the KWL reading strategy
would be effective in problem-solving was determined as the
aim of the study.
A student’s solving a problem depends on his/her under-
standing it well. For providing this, he/she needs to fully
comprehend what he/she reads. Reading comprehension
means that individuals reach a new learning as a result of
associating new information they encounter in the texts with
their prior knowledge (Y?lmaz, 2019a). Reading comprehen-
sion process occurs through conscious thinking, which helps
the reader relate thinking processes, content of the text,
prior knowledge, expectations and reading purposes (Block,
2004, as cited by Erdem, 2016). Reading comprehension can
be regarded as a process of creating a new related situation
by linking the words with schemas in mind. In this process,
mental activities such as thinking on a text or problem,
searching for the reasons, drawing conclusion, interpreting,
analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating are influential
(Gunes?, 2000). KWL, one of the reading strategies, contains
activities to develop reading comprehension skill. The KWL
table used for this strategy is a reflective table indicating
what they know, what they want to know and what they
learned. Using this strategy helps the students think on a
topic before reading it and the teacher gauge what his/her
students know after reading (Nicely, 2015). The KWL strat-
egy is quite effective in developing reading proficiency. A
great number of studies have revealed that this strategy is
useful for developing students’ reading skills and raising
The KWL (What i know, what i want to learn, what i
learned) strategy
KWL is one of the strategies used for improving reading
comprehension skill. This strategy was developed by Ogle
(1986). This strategy was named based on the initials of
“What I know, What I want to learn, What I learned”. This
strategy provides students with the opportunity to link with
their background knowledge before reading and the know-
ledge gained during reading. Table 1 shows the chart on
which the students listed their knowledge during implemen-
tation of the KWL strategy.
A three-column table is prepared before starting reading
in this strategy and the students brainstorm ideas to reveal
all they know about the topic or problem. This information
is written in column K, which is “What I know”. Then, the
students prepare and save questions related to what they
want to find out about the topic or problem in column W,
which is “What I want to learn”. During or after reading,
the students answer the questions in column W and save
their answers in column L, which is “What I learned”
(Epc?ac?an, 2009; Y?lmaz, 2019b). The KWL strategy includes
activities to reveal what background knowledge the students
have about the text to be read prior to reading, what they
know and what they want to know. This strategy consists of
three steps as follows:
1.
Step K – What I know: In this step, the students’ back-
ground knowledge and views on the new topic to be
read are concretely revealed (Hill et al., 1998). The stu-
dents are led to brainstorm (they are asked questions
about the topic) to reveal what they know about the
topic for reading. In this way, the students are provided
with textual connections before obtaining detailed infor-
mation about the text they will read. After all the stu-
2.
dents set personal goals for their own learning (Carr &
Ogle, 1987). They create lists of questions regarding
what they want to learn at the end of the text to be
read. They record the questions created in column “W”.
Before the students start reading, determining the pur-
pose of reading, knowing what the text to be read will
provide them, considering why they are reading, can
attract their attention to the text (Y?lmaz, 2008).
Step L – What I learned: In this step, the students read
the text. They answer the questions written in column
“W” during or after reading. In this way, the students
3.
construct the meaning by associating the information
they have newly learned with their prior knowledge.
After having finished answering the questions, they
record their answers in column “L”.
The KWL strategy has been found effective in developing
reading skills by a great number of studies (e.g.: Eker, 2015;
Pek€z, 2018; Rahayuningsih & Wulandari, 2014; Tokg€z,
2019; Ozy?lmaz & Alc?, 2011; Zouhor et al., 2016). Riswanto
et al. (2014) stated that the students could not read because
of their deficiencies in reading comprehension and were not
able to relate the text they read with their prior knowledge.
Active readers question for applying their schemas during
pre-reading activities, relating them with the new concept,
understanding the topics during and after reading and mak-
ing their own meanings (Alyousef, 2005; Puti, 2014; as cited
by Wijaya & Puti, 2015). Moreillon (2007) said that “reading
is making meaning from print and visual information”, and
essence of reading is to understand the message of a text or
an author accurately, thus reading comprehension requires
higher-order thinking (as cited by Wijaya & Puti, 2015).
Barton and Heidema (2002) answered the question “why
should students learn to read mathematical texts?” as follows
by citing from Martinez and Martinez (2001) and NCTM
(2000). Children discuss what happens when they read and
write mathematics. Therefore, mathematical language and
mathematical reading should be learned in order to focus
on the problems, work on them, convey ideas consistently
and explicitly, arrange arguments, develop interpreting flexi-
bility and understand own problem-solving and thinking
processes. Mathematical texts contain more concepts than
all other types of texts. As most of these concepts are
abstract, it becomes more difficult for students to under-
stand and visualize them. Students generally look for a page
of text including examples, graphs and problems to solve by
skipping statements of important information (Thomas,
1988; as cited by Barton & Heidema, 2002). On the other
hand, mathematical texts are often very short and compact,
and each sentence includes a lot of concepts and informa-
tion. The fact that the sentences have certain meanings and
connect to other sentences sensibly may cause students
wanting to read these texts swiftly not to notice important
details, explanations and underlying logic (Barton &
Heidema, 2002). Cognitively, reading is more than reading a
text aloud with correct pronunciation. Active reading con-
tains thinking on the things read. Reading comprehension
requires a reader’s synthesizing information in a text, inter-
preting, evaluating and using it selectively (Wijaya & Puti,
2015). The mathematical literacy processes are necessary
both for problem-solving and developing concepts. These
skills are necessary for solving mathematical problems as
well (Barton & Heidema, 2002). This is because of the fact
that determining, understanding and questioning the prob-
lem is primarily needed to solve a problem. The questioning
can be started with determining if there is incomplete or
extra information. Questioning helps to distinguish the
information unnecessary for solving the problem, to deter-
mine the information necessary for solving it and to create a
uals make a plan for solving the problem and solve the
problem if they have know-how – that is topic knowledge.
It can also contribute to decide whether solution of a prob-
lem is sensible and correct. It was expressed that the KWL
strategy encourages pupils to be mentally active during the
learning process, facilitates learning and remembering con-
cepts and topics, develops their skills in organizing their
prior knowledge and in questioning (Alsalhi, 2020).
Therefore, it can be considered as a metacognitive strategy
(Gammill, 2006). the KWL is a strategy used by teachers to
help students activate their schemas prior to reading,
improve comprehension during reading and organize their
revealed together.
increased ninth graders’ achievement, Tas?l?dere and
Ery?lmaz (2012) emphasized that intervention merging read-
ing strategy and conceptual physics approach raised student
achievement significantly. Zouhor et al. (2016) found the
KWL strategy to be efficient in increasing the sixth graders’-
metacognition and physics success. Alsalhi (2020) revealed
that the KWL strategy contributed positively to the 4th
graders’ success in science courses. Phromphithak (2015)
investigated impact of the KWL strategy on 10th graders’
mathematics achievement. As a result of the research, she
found that the KWL strategy was effective in pupils’ under-
understanding word problems, Fuentes (1998) stated that
reading comprehension strategies can also be used to under-
stand the problem stories. O€zdemir and Serts€z (2006)
stated that providing middle school 6th graders with reading
comprehension behavior had a positive effect on their math-
ematics achievement.
Ilg?n and Arslan (2012) examined the effects of problem-
solving instruction through text-based activities on problem-
solving achievement levels of primary school second graders.
As a result of their studies, they concluded that problem-
solving instruction with texts was useful for helping the stu-
dents gain the steps of problem-solving, which were
“determining possible solutions in the light of the collected
data, practicing the determined solution, evaluating solution
types, assessing the problem-solving method employed”.
Ulu (2017) investigated the impact of reading compre-
hension and problem-solving strategies of primary school
4th graders on classifying the students by high and low
problem-solving achievement. As a result of the study, it
was found that fluent reading skills had no effect on classifi-
cation of students by high and low problem-solving achieve-
ment. In addition, it was stated that the students with high
problem-solving achievement had high levels of comprehen-
sion, yet there was no significant difference between the stu-
dents with high and low problem-solving achievement in
terms of having basic skills of mathematics.
Solving mathematical word problems requires using both
mental representation skill and reading comprehension skill.
Boonen, Koning, Jolles, and Van der Schoot (2016) stated
that reading comprehension training and a realistic mathem-
atics education approach had positive effects on middle
school 6th graders’ ability to solve mathematical word prob-
lems and that developing reading skills for solving mathem-
atical word problems should be attached great importance.
In a study conducted by Nicolas and Emata (2018) to exam-
ine the development of problem-solving skills of middle
school 7th graders by employing the comprehension strategy
with an integrative approach in mathematics teaching, a sig-
nificant difference was found in favor of the experimen-
tal group.
O€ztu€rk et al. (2020) found in their study, in which they
investigated the impact of reading comprehension skills on
mathematics self-efficacy perception, mathematics attitude
and the ability to solve non-routine mathematical problems,
that there was a positive and significant correlation between
reading comprehension skills and other variables. There is a
positive and significant correlation between reading compre-
hension skill and problem-solving skill.
There have been numerous studies, some of which were
described in detail above, showing that there is a positive
and significant correlation between students’ reading com-
prehension skills and problem-solving skills (Boonen et al.,
2016; C?avus?oglu, 2010; K?l?c?, 2009; Pape, 2004; Ulu et al.,
2016; Uzun, 2010). It can be understood from these studies
that reading comprehension skills need to be developed in
early childhood (Silver & Cai, 1996; Helwig et al.,1999, as
cited by Boonen et al., 2016).
Problem-solving which is one of the methods that helps
bringing information to life, activates the students in daily
life and learning-teaching settings and encourages the stu-
dents to learn to learn (Ozcan, 2007) is defined as the way
of reaching a solution when the solution is unknown (Polya,
1962). Thus, mathematics, itself, is considered to be a prob-
lem-solving activity. Therefore, problem-solving has been
included in curriculums as one of the basic approaches in
mathematics teaching ( MoNE, 2013, 2018; National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)), 1989; Silver, 1994). It
is necessary to apply reasoning in the process of problem-
solving (Schoenfeld, 1985). Reasoning is the process of
thinking by considering all factors and obtaining a reason-
able result. Individuals who are able to reason about a topic
have sufficient knowledge in that topic, can examine new
situation encountered thoroughly, explore, guess, infer, reach
to some results by justifying thoughts, explain these results
and offer solutions (Umay, 2003). Hence, a problem cannot
be solved unless it is understood well, and mathematical
ideas cannot be defended without showing reasons.
Although most people believe that there is only one way to
solve a mathematical problem (NCTM, 2000), each individ-
ual has his own reasoning styles and ways of solution
(Umay, 2003). In this context, students’ knowledge can be
questioned and interpreted as they compulsorily reason dur-
ing the process of problem-solving. In this process, the stu-
dents are expected to apply cognitive processes such as
understanding a problem, collecting the necessary data for
the solution, solving the problem and deciding whether the
solution is logical or not (Charles, 1985). The students have
to gather the concepts and operations during problem-solv-
ing and apply them to solve the problem (Bernardo, 1999).
Polya (1973) explained problem-solving process in steps
which are understanding the problem, devising a suitable
plan for solving the problem, changing the plan if necessary,
checking the methods, evaluating the data obtained during
problem-solving and interpreting significance of the solu-
tion. On the other hand, Gonzales (1998) suggested that a
final step, problem posing or problem writing, was necessary
to be added to Polya’s problem-solving strategy. In this con-
text, five-step grading scale received from Baki (2014) was
employed in the current study in order to evaluate each
step separately.
From the explanations made in the theoretical framework
and the results of the studies, some inferences can be made
in the context of the KWL reading strategy and problem-
solving. The first of these inferences is the way of imple-
menting the KWL reading strategy in classroom setting. A
KWL table is created before starting a new topic, and this
table can be filled in as a class or individually. Meanwhile,
the teacher should remind the students to use mathematical
concepts and terms. While filling in the table, the students
should be asked questions that would help them explain
what they have learned, how they have solved problems, and
their reasoning strategies. Secondly, the KWL reading strat-
egy helps students to activate their prior knowledge, organ-
ize their knowledge and summarize the topic in the learning
process. In this process, the students share various ideas by
This research aimed to examine impact of using the KWL
reading strategy to teach the primary school 4th graders the
learning area of “numbers and operations”, the sub-learning
area of “fractions” and the topic of “fractions and operations
with fractions” on the problem-solving achievement of stu-
dents. Accordingly, sub-problems of the study were deter-
mined as follows.
Are there any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement pretest scores of the EG
students on whom the KWL strategy was employed and
of the CG students on whom current instructional pro-
gram was employed?
Are there any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement posttest scores of the EG
students on whom the KWL strategy was employed and
of the CG students on whom current instructional pro-
gram was employed?
Are there any statistically significant differences between
pretest and posttest problem-solving achievement scores
of the EG students on whom the KWL strategy
was employed?
Are there any statistically significant differences between
pretest and posttest problem-solving achievement scores
of the CG students on whom current instructional pro-
gram was employed?
4.
Model of the research
A quasi-experimental design with pretest-posttest control
group was employed in the study. This design provides great
statistical potential to the researcher about testing the effect
of intervention on dependent variable, and helps interpret-
ation of findings obtained within the context of cause and
effect (Bu€yu€ko€ztu€rk, 2011). The tests used in the experimen-
tal group (EG) and in the control group (CG) during the
study were given in Table 2. Accordingly, in both of the
groups, test of equivalency (TE) and Problem-Solving
Achievement Test (PSAT) were employed as the pretest
while Problem-Solving Achievement Test (PSAT) was used
as the posttest. Implementation with the KWL reading strat-
egy was used in the experimental group while implementa-
tion based on the current instructional program was applied
in the control group. The empirical design of the research
was given in Table 2.
Study group
The research was conducted in 2018–2019 academic year.
The study group consisted of thirty five 4th grade students
studying at a primary school in Bart?n, Turkey. The EG
1.
2.
3.
included 18 students, and the CG included 17 students.
Both groups were taught in accordance with the learning
outcomes of the topic of fractions included in 4th grade
MoNE (2018). The ready-made groups were preferred to
create the EG and CG. Equal groups were determined after
the implementation of the test of equivalency, and one of
them was assigned as the EG, while the other was assigned
as the CG. Instruction was implemented using the KWL
reading strategy in EG, while it was implemented using the
activities in the current MoNE (2018) in the CG. The imple-
mentation lasted 20 lesson hours in each classroom.
Data collection tools
Test of equivalency (TE), Problem-Solving Achievement
Test (PSAT) to gauge effect of instruction with the KWL
strategy and reading texts prepared to be used in both
groups were employed as data collection tools. The reading
texts were chosen from primary school 4th grade
Turkish coursebook.
Test of equivalency (TE)
A prior knowledge test prepared for primary school 4th
graders by Gu€ngo€r (2014) was used as test of equivalency in
this research. This test was conducted in order to determine
whether the groups were equal or not. The validity and reli-
ability of the test had been provided by G€ng€r (2014), and
the reliability coefficient had been found to be 0.71. The test
was applied to both groups. The purpose of applying this
test was to compare initial achievement levels of the EG and
CG students. In the test of equivalency, there were questions
about learning outcomes of addition, subtraction, multiplica-
tion, reading natural numbers, writing natural numbers, and
greatness-smallness in natural numbers. The Test of equiva-
lency was given in Appendix 1.
Problem-solving achievement test (PSAT)
A PSAT including 9 problems, which were analyzed for val-
idity and reliability, about the topic of “fractions and opera-
tions with fractions” was prepared by the researchers
benefitting from the literature (Baykul, 2016; O€zc?elik, 2018;
Posamentier & Krulik, 2016; Yazgan & Arslan, 2017) in
order to evaluate students’ problem-solving achievements. In
the analysis of PSAT, each step of the problem-solving pro-
cess that are understanding the problem, devising a plan,
carrying out the plan, looking back and suggesting a prob-
lem was considered as a separate sub-problem. In order to
ensure the content validity of the problems in the test before
implementation of the PSAT, two content area experts, a
Procedures
There were 18 students in the EG who were taught using
the KWL strategy and 17 students in the CG who were
taught in accordance with current instructional program.
The data of 4 students in the CG were not included in the
study since they had not attended the lessons regularly. The
studies carried out during the empirical process were pre-
sented in Figure 1. Instruction was implemented according
to the KWL strategy in the EG and to current Mathematics
Curriculum in the CG by the primary school 4th grade
class teacher.
Before starting the implementation, the 4th grade class
teacher and the EG students were informed about the KWL
strategy, and they were told about things to be done during
the implementation. Instruction with the KWL strategy was
carried out with 9 texts chosen from 4th grade Turkish
coursebook. The reading texts were studied using the KWL
strategy in the EG. These reading texts were as follows:
The topic of fractions was taught to the EG by the same
teacher in the Math lessons using the KWL strategy. The
implementation lasted for 20 lesson hours. The study of the
two students in the EG about the reading texts “Colors
Hidden in the Light” and “The World Is Round” were given
in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively.
In the EG and CG, 13 mathematical activities about the
topic of fractions and operations with fractions in primary
school mathematics course book were implemented.
However, the mathematical activities in the EG were carried
out by using the KWL strategy. The mathematical activities
performed by 2 students in the EG using the KWL reading
strategy were given in Figure 4. The activities were carried
out in mathematics and Turkish lessons synchronously.
PSAT was applied to the EG and CG students as pretest and
posttest before and after the implementation.
The KWL table is a reflective chart showing what students
know, what they want to learn and what they learned (Ogle,
1986). The teacher firstly asked the students to create their
own KWL charts after giving them brief information about the
KWL. At the beginning of the implementation, the students
were asked questions about the topic in order to reveal their
prior knowledge via brainstorming. The students were required
to remember their background knowledge and take notes by
doing brainstorming. They wrote this knowledge on ‘K’ col-
umn of the KWL chart. After they became familiar to the
problem, the problem statement was read and definition of the
problem was made. In this step, the given and the asked things
in the problem were identified, and the students were asked to
draw a figure or schema related to the problem. They moved
to the step of understanding and interpreting the knowledge
with this step. They wrote what they wanted to learn or
thought they knew on ‘W’ column of the KWL chart. In these
two steps, they started to link the knowledge they knew or
thought they knew to the knowledge they wanted to know.
After reading the problem and entering into the process of
interpretation, the students wrote what they learned from the
problem on ‘L’ column, which is ‘what I learned’. By this way,
the students, who organized and arranged their knowledge
moved to the second step of problem-solving – devising a
plan. Devising a plan is creating a solution strategy for the
problem by organizing the data and identifying all information
included in the problem. This step contains remembering the
current problem, similar problems and solutions. In this case,
it means that the student has established a link between his/
her prior knowledge and new knowledge. If the student has
strategy knowledge to carry out the plan he/she has devised,
he/she can find a solution by carrying out the plan. In the step
of carrying out the plan, the students were asked to question
the given statement, perform foreseen solutions regarding the
problem, check if their solutions worked or not - or if they
were correct or not, express their reasons for proving that their
solutions were correct. In the final step, they were required to
write a new problem similar to the given problem. The imple-
mentation was performed sometimes individually and some-
times by creating a discussion environment.
An experimental group student’s solution found by using
the KWL strategy was given in Figure 5. In order to under-
stand the implementation process better, sample explana-
tions that the student made about use of the KWL strategy
in solving the problem and interpretations were included in
Table 3.
In Table 3, it was seen that the student wrote what he
knew about the topic on ‘K’ column and recalled prior
knowledge – the basis for solving the problem – from men-
tal schema. In ‘W’ column, the questions that would help
problem-solving and that are needed to be asked in the steps
of mathematical problem-solving were asked. The student
had been asked to write interrogative expressions in ‘W’ col-
umn. In ‘L’ column, the problem was solved by finding the
answers of the questions in ‘W’ column.
Quantitative data analysis techniques were employed in
order to reveal if there were any statistically significant dif-
ferences between problem-solving achievement pretest and
posttest scores of the students in the EG, to whom the KWL
reading strategy was applied and of the students in the CG,
to whom instruction was implemented in accordance with
the current instructional program. Therefore, the questions
in the problem-solving achievement test were scored using
the progressive scoring scale by the two researchers, and
intercoder reliability was examined according to Miles and
Huberman’s (1994) formula. The intercoder reliability was
found to be 89%. For the remaining 11% difference, the two
researchers gathered to discuss and reached an agreement.
Thus, a full correspondence (100%) was achieved by increas-
ing the correspondence rate between the coders. Secondly,
SPSS Package Program was used in order to determine
whether there was a statistically significant difference
between the scores of the EG and CG students. Non-para-
metric techniques were employed for data analysis since
the number of subjects in the groups was small. Mann-
Whitney U test checks if the scores obtained from two
independent samples differ significantly. This test controls
if two independent groups have similar distributions in the
population in terms of the concerned variable. U test
requires the dependent variable to be in ordinal scale, and
observations need to be independent of each other.
Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test is used to test significance of
the difference between the scores belonging to two depend-
ent measuring sets. This test is used as an alternative for t-
test in two paired groups when variables do not show nor-
mal distribution (B€y€k€ztu€rk, 2013). The Wilcoxon’s
Signed Rank Test for the analyses between the dependent
groups and The Mann-Whitney U Test for the analyses
between the independent groups were implemented. This
method was preferred since the data obtained from the
research were not distributed normally, and the study
group was small.
In this section of the research, the findings and interpreta-
tions were included. Firstly, the results of the test of equiva-
lency, which was conducted to determine if the groups were
equal, and descriptive analysis results were presented. Then,
the sub-problems of the research were given under sections.
Results of the test of equivalency and
descriptive analysis
The normality test results examined to compare equivalency
of the EG and CG were presented in Table 4, and t-test
results were presented in Table 5.
It was understood from Table 4 that the scores received
from the test of equivalency by the experimental and control
groups did not show normal distribution (pEG¼.116,
pCG¼.036). Thus, results of the t-test, which was used for
independent samples were given in Table 5.
Independent samples t-test result regarding the scores
received by the EG and CG students was p¼.655. As the cal-
culated p value was greater than .05, it was concluded that
there were not any significant differences between the EG
and CG before the implementation [t (33) ¼.451, p¼.655
>.05]. Thus, it can be claimed that the EG and CG were
equivalent before the implementation of the KWL read-
ing strategy.
In Table 6, pretest and posttest mean scores and standard
deviations of the control and experimental groups regarding
the problem-solving steps and overall problem-solving
achievement. It was seen that the posttest mean scores of
the control group in understanding the problem
(X ¼ 10,41), devising a plan (X ¼ 9,59), carrying out the
plan (X ¼ 12,29), looking back (X ¼ 1, 35) and overall
problem-solving (X ¼ 40, 00) were higher than their pretest
mean scores in understanding the problem (X ¼ 7,76),
devising a plan (X ¼ 3, 94), carrying out the plan
(X ¼ 6, 71), looking back (X ¼ , 88) and overall problem-
solving (X ¼ 26, 12) respectively, yet their posttest mean
scores in suggesting a problem (X ¼ 4, 71) were lower than
their pretest mean scores in the same step (X ¼ 5, 47). On
the other hand, the posttest mean scores of the experimental
group in understanding the problem (X ¼ 17, 78), devising a
plan (X ¼ 14,06), carrying out the plan (X ¼ 12, 72), look-
ing back (X ¼ 1, 17), suggesting a problem (X ¼ 8,28) and
overall problem-solving (X ¼ 55,72) were higher than their
pretest mean scores in understanding the problem
(X ¼ 7, 22), devising a plan (X ¼ 3,22), carrying out the
plan (X ¼ 5, 39), looking back (X ¼ , 83), suggesting a
problem (X ¼ 2, 33) and overall problem-solving
(X ¼ 22, 22) respectively.
Findings and interpretations related to the first
sub-problem
The Mann-Whitney U Test was employed to determine if
there were any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement pretest scores of the EG and
CG students, and the related finding was given in Table 7.
In Table 7, the Mann-Whitney U Test results according
to the pretest scores received from the Progressive Scoring
Scale (PSS) by the EG and CG students were shown for
each step. Accordingly, no significant differences were found
between two groups as a result of U test regarding the pre-
test scores received from the steps of PSS, which were
understanding the problem (U ¼ 137.500, p>.05), devising a
plan (U¼ 136.500, p>.05), carrying out the plan
(U ¼144.500, p>.05), looking back (U ¼99.000, p>.05) and
suggesting a problem (U ¼ 144.500, p> :05). Table 7 indi-
cated that there were no significant differences between both
groups regarding their pretest sum scores in all steps of
problem-solving (U ¼ 138.500, p>.05).
Findings and interpretations related to the second
sub-problem
The Mann-Whitney U Test was employed to determine if
there were any statistically significant differences between
problem-solving achievement posttest scores of the EG and
CG students, and the related finding was given in Table 8.
In Table 8, the Mann-Whitney U Test results according
to the posttest scores received from the Progressive Scoring
Scale (PSS) by the EG and CG students were shown for
each step. Accordingly, a significant difference was found
between two groups as a result of U test regarding the postt-
est scores received from the steps of PSS, which were
Findings and interpretations related to the third
sub-problem
The third sub-problem “Are there any statistically significant
differences between pretest and posttest problem-solving
achievement scores of the EG students on whom the KWL
strategy was employed?” was tested with the Wilcoxon’s
Signed Rank Test. Accordingly, the Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank
Test results regarding whether there was a statistically sig-
nificant difference between each step of problem-solving and
the pretest and posttest scores received from the PSS before
and after the implementation by the EG students were pre-
sented in Table 9.
It was seen in Table 9 that there was a significant differ-
ence between the pretest and posttest scores received from
the steps of understanding the problem (z ¼3.728, p<.05),
devising a plan (z¼ 3,724, p<.05), carrying out the plan
(z ¼3.584, p<.05), looking back (z ¼ 3.628, p<.05) and sug-
gesting a problem (z¼ 3.523, p< :05) and problem-solving
achievement (z¼ 3.724, p< .05) by the EG. Based on this
result, it was understood that instruction with the KWL
strategy developed problem-solving achievement of the EG
students. According to the results of the analysis in Table 9,
the KWL reading strategy was effective in fostering the EG
students’ achievement in each step and in problem-solving.
Findings and interpretations related to the fourth
sub-problem
The fourth sub-problem “Are there any statistically signifi-
cant differences between pretest and posttest problem-solv-
ing achievement scores of the CG students on whom
current instructional program was employed?” was tested
with the Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank Test. Accordingly, the
Wilcoxon’s Signed Rank Test results regarding whether
there was a statistically significant difference between each
step of problem-solving and the pretest and posttest scores
received from the PSS before and after the implementation
by the CG students were presented in Table 10.
Table 10 indicated that there was a significant difference
between the pretest and posttest scores received from the
steps of devising a plan (z¼ 3.305, p<.05), carrying out the
plan (z ¼3.538, p<.05) and problem-solving achievement
(z¼ 3.724, p< .05) by the CG. However, there were not any
significant differences between their pretest and posttest
scores received from the steps of understanding the problem
(z¼ 1.866, p >.05), looking back (z ¼3.628, p<.05) and sug-
gesting a problem (z¼ 3.523, p< :05). Based on this result,
it can be claimed that the implementation in accordance
with the current instructional program helped the students
be successful in problem-solving. Table 10 showed that there
was a significant difference between the pretest and posttest
scores of the CG students as a result of the analyses imple-
mented by converting the scores obtained from each step of
the problem-solving to the total score. On the other hand,
while the students were successful in solving mathematical
problems, they were not able to show the same success for
the steps of understanding the problem, looking back and
suggesting a problem. It can be said that the basic under-
standing of obtaining this finding was that problem-solving
achievement was considered as result-oriented. It was under-
stood from Table 10 that there were not any significant dif-
ferences between the test scores of the CG students obtained
before and after the implementation in the most important
steps of problem-solving that are understanding the
problem, looking back and suggesting a similar problem. On
the contrary, the step of problem-solving was successfully
carried out by the students in the CG.
In the present study, impact of the KWL reading strategy on
graders was investigated. It was found in this study, in
which a quasi-experimental design with pretest-posttest CG
was employed, that the KWL strategy improved the stu-
dents’ problem-solving achievement as a result of non-para-
metric tests.
Each step of the problem-solving process was separately
analyzed. Accordingly, there was a significant difference in
favor of the EG in each step of problem-solving which are
understanding the problem, devising a plan, looking back
and suggesting a problem. Considering the sum of the
scores obtained from each step, a statistically significant dif-
ference was found in problem-solving achievement of the
two groups in favor of the EG. However, no significant dif-
ference was found between the scores of the EG and CG
students in the step of carrying out the plan.
A significant difference was observed between the sum of
the scores received from each step by the EG and CG stu-
dents in favor of the former ones as a result of the within-
groups analyses. On the other hand, no significant differen-
ces were found between the pretest and posttest scores
received in the steps of understanding the problem, looking
back and suggesting a problem by the CG students when
each step was separately analyzed.
Understanding the problem is the most important step of
problem-solving. This stems from the fact that a student
who cannot understand the problem cannot choose and
carry out an appropriate strategy for solving the problem
and cannot interpret the results. The current research
revealed how important the step of understanding the prob-
lem for solving a problem is. Within-group test results indi-
cated that the results could not be appropriately interpreted
by the CG students, to whom the instruction in accordance
with the activities in the current instructional program was
administered. It cannot be claimed that the student can real-
ize solution of a problem completely in situations in which
the link between the given and the asked in a problem and
the bridge between old and new information cannot be
established. In this respect, it can be suggested that the
KWL reading strategy was effective in helping the EG stu-
dents understand the problem. The findings obtained from
the EG students indicated that the KWL reading strategy
was beneficial for solving a mathematical problem. If a stu-
dent can devise a strategy for solving a problem and can
implement this strategy upon understanding the problem by
using the KWL strategy, the problem can be solved. An
individual can produce various solutions for the problems
with appropriate reasoning according to his/her own charac-
teristics (Umay, 2003). Thus, readers need to synthesize,
interpret and evaluate information from the text and use it
if suitable (Wijaya & Puti, 2015). Finding a correct solution
depends on appropriate reasoning and understanding the
problem thoroughly because the students gather the con-
cepts and operations during problem-solving and use them
for solving the problem (Bernardo, 1999). Therefore, it can
be stated that the strategy applied to the EG students con-
tributed positively to the students’ problem-solving achieve-
ments considering that the steps trigger each other. Several
studies whose results are similar to the result obtained in
the step of understanding the problem in the current study
(Prakitipong & Nakamura, 2006; Tertemiz, 1994; Hegarty
et al., 1995, Panasuk and Beyranevand, 2010, as cited by Ulu
et al., 2016; Ilg?n & Arslan, 2012) have been conducted. In
addition, Fuentes’s (1998) view that reading comprehension
strategies can be used to understand the problem story due
to the similarities between understanding the story and
understanding the word problems has supported the result
of the current study in the step of understanding
the problem.
Another result of this study was that there were not any
significant differences between the scores of the two groups
received in the step of carrying out the plan - that is solving
the problem. The reason of this situation may be that the
students did not know the ways of problem-solving.
However, the results of the Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test
analysis which was conducted for the dependent groups
revealed that there was a significant difference in the step of
solving the problem. In other words, the students in both
groups reached the result by solving the problems with the
mathematical activities given. Another reason of this case
was that the students may have had usual thoughts toward
learning mathematics. This can be explained as follows.
Despite the improvement studies in the curriculums con-
ducted in Turkey from time to time, it is not realistic to
expect important and sudden changes as a result of these
improvements and a certain amount of time is necessary
(Baki, 2014). It was observed that carrying out the plan, that
is the solution of the problem, was generally carried out in
the CG compared to the other steps of the problem-solving
process. However, no statistically significant difference was
found between the two groups. This may stem from the fact
that the students just tried to find the numerical result of
the problem without using mental skills such as collecting
the necessary data for the solution by analyzing a problem
thoroughly, deciding whether the solution is logical and
adapting the problem to similar situations. This is because
of the fact that the students generally regard mathematics as
a structure consisting of formulas and rules and needed to
be memorized. The students with such a thought adopt their
teacher’s solution by using his/her mathematics and algo-
rithms. A student who is not able to produce his/her own
solution and own mathematics has difficulty in solving the
problem as he/she cannot transfer his/her superficial know-
ledge to different situations. Although our schools try to
teach conceptual knowledge, functional knowledge is
focused more (Baki, 2014). This leads students to be able to
solve the problems they already know or have encountered
before. In the current study, the reason of nonexistence of a
statistically significant difference between the two groups in
the step of carrying out the plan may be considered in
this context.
Similarly, the EG students were more successful than the
CG students in the step of suggesting a problem. With the
help of the KWL strategy employed in the EG, the students
were able to analyze the problems thoroughly and to trans-
fer them mostly to similar situations. The analysis of the
data obtained from the step of suggesting a problem indi-
cated that there was a significant difference in favor of
the EG.
Considering the results of the current study in general,
the results of the current study are similar to the results of
the studies carried out by Hite (2009), Nicolas and Emata
(2018), O€zdemir and Sertso€z (2006), O€ztu€rk et al. (2020),
Prakitipong and Nakamura (2006), Vilenius-Tuohimaa
et al. (2008).
In the current study, the KWL strategy helped the stu-
dents solve the problems by recalling their knowledge famil-
iar with the problems via a KWL chart, determining what
they wanted to learn and linking this knowledge with the
knowledge they wanted to learn. Nicely’s (2015) statement
that the KWL chart is a reflective table indicating what
students know, what they want to learn and what they
learned can be shown as evidence fort his sentence. In add-
ition, with the use of the KWL strategy, students can con-
centrate on analytical reading (Siribunnam & Tayraukham,
2009) and actively link the old and new knowledge
(Ibrahim, 2012). Students are encouraged to take over
responsibility with brainstorming in the classroom and to
expand their ideas and perceptions about the topic (Szabo,
2006). In the current study, it can be stated that the KWL
strategy led the students to think, reason and question in
the process of problem-solving because the problem-solving
process includes the processes of active questioning and
thinking (Schoenfeld, 1985). In the present study, specifically
impact of the KWL reading strategy on the students’ prob-
lem-solving achievement was investigated. It can be indi-
cated that the results of the current study are similar to the
results of the studies revealing that reading comprehension
has a positive effect on mathematics achievement and math-
ematical problem-solving achievement (Goktas?, 2010;
Lerkkanen et al., 2005; Nicely, 2015; Pape, 2004; Passolunghi
& Pazzaglia, 2005; Phromphithak, 2015; Vilenius-Tuohimaa
et al., 2008).
Ulu et al. (2016) concluded that instruction of reading
comprehension and problem-solving strategies raised the 5th
graders’ problem-solving achievement. On the other hand,
Ulu et al. (2016) claimed that reading comprehension strat-
egies could explain just 7,86% of the change in problem-
solving achievement, and students’ readiness level were
more influential in predicting problem-solving achievement
than their reading comprehension strategies. Thus, it cannot
be asserted that the results of the current study conform
with the results of the study carried out by Ulu et al. (2016).
The current study employed quantitative methods to
examine the problem-solving achievements of the primary
school 4th graders, each step of which was analyzed separ-
ately, with the KWL reading strategy. A qualitative study
can be carried out in order to obtain in-depth information
about reasons of these results. In addition, mixed studies in
which factors affecting the problem-solving skill by using
different reading strategies at different grade levels are
employed can be conducted.
