Title:
Indoor Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: 
A New Approach†
Abstract:

----------------------
Subtitles:

 I. Kerosene to LPG Program in Indonesia
 II. Data
 III. Empirical Framework
 V. Discussion and Conclusion


Text:
----------------------
In most developing countries, cooking fuels 
emit indoor air pollutants that may lead to poor 
health. The World Health Organization claims 
that dirty cooking fuels are associated with 
approximately 4.3 million premature deaths 
each year (WHO 2016). The magnitude of this 
correlation varies widely across studies, and 
a causal link has not been clearly established. 
Even though indoor air pollution is one major 
threat to global health, economists have only 
recently become interested in this issue.1
In cross-sectional studies, risks of alternative 
fuels and cooking stoves can be confounded 
by the use of multiple fuels, not all of which 
may be reported, plus many unobserved fac-
tors that may be associated with cooking fuel 
choices. Household behavior, among other fac-
tors, obscures health impacts. For example, the 
largest randomized control trial (RCT) found 
no effect from free use of new, cleaner cooking 
stoves, because households used them irregu-
larly and inappropriately (Hanna, Duflo, and 
Greenstone 2016). People may also take actions 
to avoid inhaling smoke or particulate matter, 
especially when the pollutants are obvious and 
cause discomfort. These findings further show 
that the link between indoor air pollution and 
health is inconclusive.
This study proposes a new approach to esti-
mate the impact of changes in indoor air quality 
on infant mortality. I use a quasi-experimental
design, leveraging what may be the largest ker-
osene to liquid petroleum gas (LPG) conversion 
program implemented in a developing country. 
The Indonesian government redirected kerosene 
subsidy budgets to LPG, a more efficient and 
cleaner fuel compared to kerosene. It is widely 
known that LPG produces significantly less 
PM 2.5 than kerosene because of higher combus-
tion efficiency (Peters et al. 1997; Smith, Rogers, 
and Cowlin 2005; Lam et al. 2012; Barron and 
Torero 2017). This program, motivated mainly 
by a rising governmental cost of subsidizing 
kerosene, successfully reduced household use of 
kerosene by 83 percent in just 4 years.
This identification strategy improves upon the 
existing literature in two ways. First, pollutants 
from burning cooking fuel are anecdotally the 
largest source of indoor air pollution. In contrast 
with smoke from tobacco or kerosene lamps, 
households consume much more cooking fuel. 
While cooking, members of the household also 
spend several hours close to the stoves, thus 
increasing their exposure level. Second, the pro-
gram is plausibly exogenous to household’s fuel 
choice, unlike person-specific pollutant expo-
sure which is potentially endogenous to the fuel 
choice.2
I find that the program led to an increase in 
LPG use in place of kerosene and had no effect on 
the use of wood fuel. Four fewer infants died per 
10,000 live births than would have in the absence 
of the program. Globally, approximately one bil-
lion people still rely on kerosene and other pol-
luting devices for cooking and lighting (Lam et 
al. 2012). I suggest that policy interventions that 
focus on reducing the use of kerosene and provid-
ing cleaner fuel alternatives (e.g., LPG) can be a 
way to reduce infant mortality rate.
I. Kerosene to LPG Program in Indonesia
The kerosene to LPG conversion program 
began in May 2007 due to the increasing cost 
of subsidizing kerosene. This program impacted 
86 million people3 over four years. The price of 
subsidized kerosene was $0.41 per liter while 
the price of subsidized LPG was $0.42 per kg.4 
Although the prices were similar, LPG burns 
more efficiently than kerosene as households 
would need approximately 0.4 kg of LPG for 
1 liter of kerosene (Budya and Arofat 2011).
The Ministry of Energy and Mineral 
Resources selected the targeted districts in a 
given fiscal year mainly based on each district’s 
level of kerosene usage and LPG infrastructure 
readiness. The program aimed to convert 73 
percent of households that had been using kero-
sene and had never used LPG. These households 
received an initial free package (a LPG canister, 
an LPG stove, a hose and a regulator) and were 
allowed to refill the canister at the subsidized 
price. By 2008 the package had been distributed 
to 84 districts, mainly big cities in Java, and by 
2011 the program had reached out to include 
169 districts (out of 354). Figure 1 shows the 
gradual decrease in kerosene supply which is 
replaced by the increasing supply of LPG start-
ing in January 2008.
II. Data
of 
Demographic and Health Surveys (IDHS) 
for the years 2002, 2007, and 2012 (Statistics 
Indonesia 2003, 2008, 2012). IDHS 2007 and 
2012 include all provinces (33 regions and 354 
districts) whereas IDHS 2002 excludes five 
regions: Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam, Maluku, 
North Maluku, and Papua due to unstable polit-
ical situation. Census blocks in urban and rural 
areas were selected using multistage-stratified 
sampling for each province. The response rates 
for both household and individual interviews 
were 99 percent on average. Married women 
(15–49 years old) and/or household heads were 
asked about birth information, within five years
preceding the survey, and maternal and house-
hold characteristics.
I define infant mortality as death within one 
year of birth. Ideally, births should be matched 
to the district, the month and year of the pro-
gram implementation, but the data on the pro-
gram implementation does not have this level 
of timing detail. To address this, I use two 
approaches: (i) I match births that occurred in 
the second half of the implementation year as 
the treatment group;5 (ii) I exclude the first year 
of the program implementation (see Table 3). As 
the results are insensitive to these approaches, 
I later show the results from the first approach.
Following the literature, I use dummies for 
mother’s and spouse’s education, mother’s age 
at child birth, young mothers (i.e., mothers 
younger than 18 years old), parents’ smoking 
behavior, parents’ visits to the health facil-
ity in the last 12 months, safe drinking water 
sources (i.e., water from protected wells, water 
pipe built inside the dwellings, bottled water 
or filtered water), availability of private toilets, 
electrification, ownership of fridge and TV, and 
for the firstborns as control variables.
III. Empirical Framework
I exploit the sharp variation of fuel choices 
induced by the fuel conversion program to 
rule out the potential confounder due to the 
non-randomness of fuel choice. Links between 
indoor air pollution and infant mortality are more 
plausibly causal because infants are less likely 
to be mobile. They spend more time indoors. 
Moreover, they are not subjected to any accu-
mulated effect from unknown lifetime exposure 
to indoor air pollution. I use a difference-in-dif-
ference (DID) estimation strategy and compare 
within district and birth year average infant 
mortality rate between targeted and untargeted 
regions, following the below equation:
where y irt is the outcome variable for infant i in 
region r at time t which takes the value of 1 if the 
infant died and 0 otherwise. ? r and ? t are district 
and year of birth fixed effects to capture perma-
nent unobserved differences across districts and 
cohorts. X irt is a set of covariates that capture 
birth, parental, and household characteristics. I 
use ordinary least squares and cluster the stan-
dard errors at the district level.
T rt, the key variable of interest, is a dummy 
indicating the program implementation in dis-
trict r in year t. The identification strategy 
assumes that the timing of program implemen-
tation is uncorrelated with other changes after 
2008, conditional on district fixed effects, cohort 
fixed effects, and household level controls. This 
is a plausible assumption based on two tests: 
(i) I show similar pre-implementation trends 
in infant mortality existed in both targeted and 
untargeted districts in Figure 2 which reassure 
that the DID standard assumption is valid; (ii) I 
show that implementation timing has no asso-
ciation with trends in birth rates or household 
characteristics (not shown).
My empirical analysis focuses on compar-
ing changes in infant mortality rate within 
targeted and untargeted regions after 2008. I 
exclude 12,133 births in 2007–2008 because of 
the following reasons. Firstly, the program had 
significant operational problems.6 Moreover,
the program also heavily targeted big cities—
densely populated regions with a high level of 
kerosene consumption. Starting from 2009, 
the program was operated smoothly with-
out major operational issues. Excluding these 
regions also excludes the potential ‘unintended 
consequences’ from those operational prob-
lems. Secondly, this selected sample excludes 
the period of financial crisis that happened in 
2007–2008. A previous study on the impact of 
financial crisis in Indonesia indicates that the 
impact is not uniform across regions (Levinsohn, 
Berry, and Friedman 2003). It is therefore use-
ful to compare treatment and control groups that 
have similarity both in initial characteristics and 
trends as they are likely to be effected equally 
by the crisis.
This estimation is equivalent to the 
intent-to-treat (ITT) effect which provides a 
pragmatic benefit estimate of the policy rather 
than the actual measurement of fuel switch-
ing. The prevalence in ITT analysis is that it 
accounts for non-compliance and fuel stacking 
(e.g., when households used both kerosene and 
wood but reported wood as their primary cook-
ing fuel).
In addition to the parallel trend shown in 
Figure 2, I do further robustness checks. Table 3 
shows that the estimates are robust to the exclu-
sion of the first year of implementation (column 
1) and placebo treatments (column 2).
V. Discussion and Conclusion
This study finds a causal link between switch-
ing to cleaner fuel and infant mortality. It suggests 
that a reduction in the use of kerosene improves 
health, which is consistent with the first RCT 
that finds a reduction in lower acute respiratory 
infection among young children due to a reduc-
tion in the kerosene use from lighting (Barron 
and Torero 2017). However, this study needs fur-
ther investigation to confirm that the reduction in 
indoor air pollution induced by the program is the 
main mechanism that explains the reduction in 
infant mortality. Ongoing research examines pos-
sible channels as well as other potential outcomes 
that might be influenced by the program.
A sustainable program in clean energy inter-
vention will require a right combination of incen-
tives and restrictions for households. Indonesia’s 
kerosene to LPG program is a unique policy inter-
vention in household fuel conversion. It combines 
price subsidy and quantity restriction in the inter-
vention. The switching to LPG is “involuntary” 
in nature because the subsidized kerosene is 
removed from the targeted regions after the LPG
distribution. Perhaps it is unsurprising to find very 
high take-up rates due to this reason. My findings 
support the importance of behavioral responses 
which obscure health effects in the earlier studies 
(Hanna, Duflo, and Greenstone 2016).
By 2011, the program prevented at least 600 
infant deaths annually.7 Extrapolating this esti-
mate globally, if one billion kerosene users in 
the developing world switched to LPG it would 
save about 7,000 infants per year. This study 
provides rare, and thus valuable, evidence on the 
health effects from a clean energy intervention. 
Similar policies might be needed to encourage 
41 percent of households worldwide to switch 
from dirty fuel to cleaner cooking fuel.8
