Title:
Hands Up, Don’t Shoot: “Suicide,” Black Gun Ownership, 
and Restoring Black Masculinity on Black Arts Movement 
Stages
Abstract:
The experiences of artists and activists of the Black Arts and Black Power era continue 
to offer valuable insights into the contemporary Black liberation struggle. The dramas 
of Sanchez, Jones, and Freeman reinforce the reality that Black liberation involves 
collective effort. This profound truth is evident in Baraka’s recollection of the 1967 
Newark Rebellion, in which he took part. Baraka recalls his personal experience of 
nearly being murdered by the police—if not for the help of the Black community—in 
his unpublished essay, “Spirit House, The New Fortress” (2013). Baraka writes:
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Arm Yourself, or Harm Yourself: 
Black Masculinity and the Theatre of Assault
 Guns and Bitches: Sonia Sanchez’s Womanist Intervention
 A Black Girl Shall Lead Them: Lola E. Jones’s Womanist Intervention
 Conclusion


Text:
----------------------
Black activists of the 1960s and ’70s advocated a cultural revolution capable of de-
stroying institutional white racism—meaning the systems of oppression that dehuman-
ize, criminalize, exploit, and ultimately kill Black people. Fostering the Black aesthetic 
was seen as critical to advancing a Black cultural revolution. Black Arts Movement 
(1965–76) founder LeRoi Jones (later Amiri Baraka) conceptualized the Black aesthetic 
as a theoretical gun that Black artists could wield in support of everyday Black people. 
He provides an early statement of this critical thought in his controversial poem, “Black 
Art” (1965). Baraka writes: “we want ‘poems that kill.’ / Assassin poems, Poems that 
shoot / guns. Poems that wrestle cops into alleys / and take their weapons leaving 
them dead.”2 Baraka believed the Black aesthetic could galvanize the Black com-
munity to kill their oppressors and reclaim their power. The National Black Theatre 
(1968–present) founder Barbara Ann Teer theorized that theatre, more than any other
art form, offered the best opportunity for fostering this cultural revolution: “theater is
a form which can encompass nearly all our creative endeavors. It can disavow all the 
stereotypes and replace them with more meaningful images that represent us as we 
really are in life. We must establish for ourselves what . . . is really meaningful to us.”3 
Theatre also provided an important means for Black activists to urge Black audiences 
to take responsibility for action and justice within their communities.
Black women activists were at the forefront of this cultural revolution that was tak-
ing place on theatrical stages, reimagining the centrality of Black women’s subjectiv-
ity—their experiential knowledge, concerns, and desires—within the framework of 
the Black liberation struggle. For example, activists Sonia Sanchez, Lola E. Jones, and 
Carol Freeman stood among a cadre of artists-activists who used their creative talents 
to advocate for Black women without in any way negating concern for the collective 
well-being of Black families.4 Sanchez, Jones, and Freeman formulated new images of 
Black womanhood to demonstrate the complexities of Black women, their unique ex-
periences of injustice, and the need for their ongoing leadership within Black political 
mobilization efforts.5 However, in celebrating Black women’s deep commitment to the 
survival of Black families, Sanchez, Jones, and Freeman also issue a call for spectators 
to realize a more inclusive vision of Black liberation. Unfortunately, biases within the 
academy have amplified masculine-centered visions of Black liberation while simul-
taneously contributing to the erasure of Black women theatre artists’ more nuanced 
approach to the Black liberation struggle.
While celebrated and, at times, criticized by their peers, Sanchez’s, Jones’s, and 
Freeman’s woman-centered works faded into obscurity following the decline of the 
Black Arts Movement. Sanchez, perhaps the most recognizable name among these 
three Black women artists today, commanded respect from her comrades, but also ran 
afoul of some Black nationalists men who challenged her woman-centered writings. 
Sanchez recalls one instance while working in the attic of Baraka’s Black Arts Repertory 
Theatre/School (BART/S, 1965) when a male “comrade” held a gun to her head and 
demanded that she cease writing.6 Despite this threat to her life, Sanchez continued to 
publish works that center Black women. Jones, a short-story writer, playwright, and 
English professor, did not achieve the national reputation of either Sanchez or Free-
man. However, her woman-centered dramas energized the Black revolution on college 
campuses across the country.7 Freeman, a Louisiana native and Oakland resident, rose 
to national prominence as an award-winning poet of the Black Arts Movement. The 
Suicide, her only published play, represents the sole Black woman dramatist’s voice 
in Baraka and Larry Neal’s seminal collection, Black Fire (1968). As a self-described 
“revolutionary Black nationalist,” Freeman’s poetry and drama invoke lynching and 
Black women’s mourning to provoke collective action.8
By failing to attend to the revolutionary dramas of Sanchez, Jones, and Freeman, we 
have lost an opportunity to elucidate the political thought of Black women artists of 
the Black Power era. Their work provides a foundation for understanding the devel-
opment of Black women’s social activism today. Systemic racism and sexism within 
the academy has led, and continues to lead, to the marginalization of Black women 
artists within theatre history scholarship. While their works have been less studied or 
entirely ignored by theatre historians, the revolutionary dramas of Sanchez, Freeman, 
and Jones made profound contributions to Black Power and Black feminist discourses. 
In this essay, I examine the discourses in Sanchez’s The Bronx Is Next (1968), Jones’s 
The New Nigger, or Who’s Afraid of William Faulkner (1976), and Freeman’s The Suicide 
(1966) in order to illuminate that collectively, their works demonstrate that “none of 
us are free until all of us are free,” a mantra that women leaders of the Black Lives 
Matter movement (2013–present) have now embraced.9
The second part of this essay explores the symbolic relationship among race, gender, 
and gun violence in four revolutionary dramas of the Black Arts Movement. I begin by 
exploring Baraka’s Arm Yourself, Or Harm Yourself (1967), a play that engages with the 
Black Power rhetoric of gun ownership, hegemonic masculinity, and white-authored 
gun violence. I then consider Sanchez’s, Jones’s, and Freeman’s engagements with 
Baraka’s representative work. I situate their (at times) controversial dramas within 
Black women’s long-standing activist tradition, examining how their works produce 
womanist thought that complicates Black Power rhetoric of self-defense and masculinist 
understandings of Black liberation. By “womanist,” I refer to the Black feminist term 
coined by Alice Walker in her book, In Search of Our Mother’s Gardens: Womanist Prose 
(1983). Walker writes that a womanist “loves other women, sexually and/or nonsexu-
ally. Appreciates and prefers women’s culture, women’s emotional flexibility (values 
tears as natural counterbalance of laughter), and women’s strength. Sometimes loves 
individual men, sexually and/or nonsexually. Committed to the survival and whole-
ness of entire people, male and female.”10 While the works of women dramatists of 
the Black Arts Movement pre-date Walker’s Black feminist theorization; their dramas 
nonetheless provide an early expression of womanist thought. In detailing how the 
Black Arts Movement was less uniformly masculinist than it has sometimes been 
depicted, I also demonstrate how Sanchez’s, Jones’s, and Freeman’s early womanist 
interventions laid a critical foundation for the principles outlined by Black women 
activists who lead today’s Black Lives Matter movement.
Arm Yourself, or Harm Yourself: 
Black Masculinity and the Theatre of Assault
History has shown that white-authored violence has been one of the most effective 
ways to maintain white male supremacy and Black subjugation. During chattel slavery, 
guns were exclusively a white male prerogative. Black men were denied access to guns 
to prevent enslaved Blacks from escaping or leading insurrections that would devas-
tate an economy built on their labor. Following emancipation, white male supremacy
flourished as Jim Crow laws enabled them to use guns to patrol, imprison, and lynch 
Black people for even the most minor violations. By the 1960s, many Black activists 
perceived the gun as an extension of violent white patriarchy. The former Black Panther 
Party (1966–82) newspaper editor-in-chief Judy Juanita remembers:
Juanita’s recollection situates white police officers as looming beasts who hunt, im-
mobilize, and degrade Black men under the guise of arrest. Unfortunately, these daily 
interactions do escalate, resulting in the extrajudicial murders of Black people.
The impetus for Black Arts Movement theatre emerged from mass demonstrations 
against white-authored shootings of Black people. Indeed, the 1960s witnessed hundreds 
of race-related uprisings—often incited by white police officers shooting unarmed Black 
men and boys—throughout major US cities.12 For example, the Harlem uprisings of 
1964 were sparked by the death of a Black 15-year-old named James Powell, a Bronx 
resident who was shot and killed by a white police officer in front of witnesses outside 
of an apartment building. Hundreds of Powell’s classmates gathered to protest his fatal 
shooting, followed by six consecutive nights of demonstrations by thousands of Har-
lem residents. As extrajudicial shootings persisted throughout the country, rebellions 
continued. The summer of 1967, known as the “Long, Hot Summer of 1967,” proved 
particularly volatile, resulting in 159 race-related uprisings across the United States. 
These rebellions stirred a generation of theatre artists, including Baraka, to create Black 
art that would sustain the hearts, minds, and souls of Black Americans.
Baraka’s founding of BART/S in 1965 turned long-standing Black political thought 
into action, providing a space for Black artists and activists to commune and realize 
the artistic vision articulated in his manifesto, “The Revolutionary Theatre” (1965). 
In this text, Baraka describes revolutionary theatre as nourishment for the souls of 
Black folk, as well as a vital tool for protecting Black communities from all forms of 
white-authored violence:13 “The Revolutionary Theatre . . . must be food for all those 
who need food, and daring propaganda for the Beauty of the Human Mind. But it is 
a political theatre, a weapon to help in the slaughter of these dimwitted fat-bellied 
white guys who somehow believe that the rest of the world is here to slobber on,” 
writes Baraka.14 As a rhetorical weapon, revolutionary dramas functioned as a source 
of nourishment intended to “feed” Black minds heretofore starved of their own his-
tory and culture. As a metaphorical weapon, revolutionary dramas could destroy the 
slobbering monster: white cultural hegemony.
Baraka envisioned revolutionary dramas as a theatre of assault, as weapons Black 
artists could wield to expose harsh truths, including the need for Black men to defend 
themselves and their communities from white male violence. Baraka incorporated guns 
into his street plays in order to draw spectators, making a spectacle of the symbolic 
meaning of Black gun ownership. He recalls one occasion when he sent a BART/S 
troupe member running down the street “with a pistol chasing one of the characters 
in Black Ice. [S]eeing a brother with a gun chasing somebody who looked like a white 
man made a crowd instantly, and the show began! ”15 Baraka’s formulations were in 
keeping with masculinist Black Power imagery of the time, as exemplified by the highly 
circulated 1967 image of Black Panther Party leader Huey P. Newton seated in a wicker 
chair. In the image, Newton stares defiantly at the camera, appearing as a prince on a 
throne framed by African cultural artifacts. Eschewing a sceptre, Newton holds a shot 
gun in his right hand and African hunting staff in his left. The image evokes a call to 
use weapons—Black gun ownership and culture—to restore Black men to their right-
ful place as kings and princes. Indeed, many Black activists—including members of 
the Black Panther Party—encouraged Black male gun ownership as an essential step 
toward reclaiming their “lost” manhood or kingdom. Baraka’s formulations tap into 
Black Panther Party imagery and rhetorical strategies, conceptualizing revolutionary 
theatre as a viable platform to help restore Black manhood (fig. 1).
The restoration of Black manhood—which some Black Panther Party activists per-
ceived as tantamount to the liberation of Black America—entailed the ability to defend 
and protect the Black community from white, male-authored violence. Increasing Black 
male gun ownership became the proposed method of defense and protection, and for 
some, liberation. The Black Panther Party reinforced this ideology through spectacu-
lar displays of Black-male gun ownership during public protests. Many white male 
politicians, including California’s then-governor Ronald Reagan, attempted to disarm 
the Black Panther Party. For example, one of their most noted protests featured thirty 
party members marching to the steps of the California State Capitol building armed 
with .45 caliber pistols, .357 Magnums, and 12-gauge shotguns. Their 1967 display 
led state politicians to pass the Mulford Act, effectively preventing Panthers from 
openly carrying loaded firearms during protests and “copwatching” patrols.16 While 
politicians may have curtailed their efforts, the Black Panther Party’s performances of 
Black power inspired Black activists and offered much-needed contrast from the all-
too-familiar sight of white men leveling guns at stripped, handcuffed, and motionless 
Black people (fig. 2).
Baraka furthered Black Power rhetoric of self-defense in his one-act play Arm Yourself, 
or Harm Yourself (1967), presenting Black-male gun ownership as the only viable strategy 
for restoring Black manhood and liberating Black America. The script cover includes 
a drawing of a white police officer firing a pistol at point-blank range into the back of 
the head of a Black man kneeling with his raised hands. Weaponless, the Black man 
surrenders in the same fashion as Missouri resident Michael Brown, who uttered the
words “Don’t shoot” before being shot and killed by Ferguson police in 2014. As with 
Brown, the Black man in the image presents little threat, but meets a similar fate as 
smoke rises from the officer’s pistol. The play mirrors this outcome: it opens with white 
male police officers raiding a dwelling occupied by a character called First Brother, an 
armed activist named Second Brother, an unarmed Sister, and her unarmed husband 
Paul. Paul attempts to surrender after the police pound on the door, demanding entry 
and yelling racial slurs. He raises his hands, showing that he is unarmed and already 
injured. The police officers respond by shooting him in the stomach.
Ultimately, Arm Yourself warns that if Black men fail to take up the gun and work 
cooperatively, they will become victims of white male assault. Incensed by Paul’s 
murder, First Brother enters a Black nationalist debate with Second Brother about 
their next course of action. Unarmed, First Brother represents Black male impotence, 
having accepted the belief that he is powerless to define a better future. In contrast, 
Second Brother cocks his gun, a symbol of his continued courage, and states: “Ain’t no 
devil on this planet gonna put his bloody claws on me, brother. Not no more, my man 
. . . not no more.”17 His desire to defend himself emerges from his need to reclaim his 
manhood by protecting those he holds dear. Second Brother defends his more passive
position, stating, “I’m talking Fire . . . And protecting my family and surviving past 
these soulless savages. Surviving, man.”18 Second Brother only wants Black people to 
survive white-authored shootings; he cannot envision a world wherein Black people 
thrive. The debate dissolves into fisticuffs, and Sister pleads with the men to stop fight-
ing one another. The play concludes with the white officers bursting through the door, 
shooting and killing the Black occupants.
Unfortunately, Baraka’s perpetuation of hegemonic masculinity excludes Black women 
from the paradigm of capable leadership within the Black liberation struggle. By “hege-
monic masculinity,” I refer to the hierarchal power structure that uses identities—such 
as gender, class, sexuality, age, and race—in opposition to one another to empower 
those closest to dominant social norms while marginalizing those furthest away.19 The 
majority of Black men lack access to wealthy white men’s political, economic, and so-
cial standing. Unable to claim traditional markers of white-defined masculine power, 
Black men’s “use of their bodies, physicality, and a form of masculine aggressiveness 
becomes more important.”20 Physical aggressiveness—dominating Black women, boys, 
gay men, and poor and working-class men of other races—provided a means of com-
manding “respect,” an essential aspect of Black manhood. In Arm Yourself, Second 
Brother’s acquisition of manhood is dependent upon Sister’s subordination. As such, 
Sister does not wield a gun, does not engage in the physical altercation between First 
Brother and Second Brother, and remains voiceless during their Black nationalist debate. 
When she does speak, she only reinforces her position as a passive victim of white, 
male-authored violence. For example, Sister explains that Paul’s initial injury occurred 
while exercising his male authority. “The policeman put his hands . . . on me . . . asked 
me for identification. . . . Paul hit him . . . and he shot Paul,” recounts Sister.21 First 
Brother responds to Sister’s experience of assault with apathy, which prompts Second 
Brother to warn him, “until you, we, get enough heart to walk with this power . . . to be 
men, brother, then we deserve just what we get.”22 Second Brother considers the white 
officer’s assault of Sister as an act of “disrespect” toward Black men. Therefore taking 
up the gun (“this power”) to protect Black women becomes an important expression 
of Black manhood. Sister, who is furthest removed from hegemonic masculinity, can 
only observe the Black liberation struggle, not actively participate.
Baraka’s production of Arm Yourself was not intended to embolden Black women to 
take up arms and lead the revolution, but rather to inspire Black men to action. The 
phrase “Arm Yourself, or Harm Yourself,” much like today’s “Hands Up, Don’t Shoot,” 
was a rallying cry during the Black Power era. Baraka uses this Black activist slogan 
as the title of his work and appends the subtitle, “A Message of Self-Defense to Black 
Men, ” explicitly identifying Black men as his target audience and agents of initiating 
armed resistance. Arm Yourself premiered at Spirit House, a theatre charged with at-
tending to the concerns of the Black community of Newark. Baraka penned the play 
in 1967, as police brutality and shootings of unarmed Black people continued to rise, 
eventually resulting in the Newark Rebellion that same year. Turning critical thought 
into action, performances at Spirit House—led by the acting troupe Spirit House Mov-
ers—were intended to galvanize the Black community. The theatre historian Harry 
Elam Jr. describes typical performances:
Performed within the context of Newark political activism, Arm Yourself did not simply 
raise awareness of white-authored gun violence; it issued a call-to-arms for Black men 
to reclaim their manhood and protect their communities.
Sister’s exclusion from the Black Power debate contradicts the reality that Black 
women—cis, queer, trans, or otherwise—have always been and continue to be active 
agents of social change. In terms of artistic activism, Black women have a long history of 
using theatre to protest white-authored violence on Black people. During the Harlem 
Renaissance, Black women activists such as Angelina Weld Grimke, Georgia Douglas 
Johnson, Mary P. Burrill, and countless others produced a body of anti-lynching plays 
to raise awareness and incite community action against the extrajudicial murders of 
Black men, women, and children. Their efforts, and those that came before them, in-
spired Black women artist-activists of the Black Arts Movement, who in turn fostered 
a critical womanist intervention within Black Power discourse.
As Black women activists, Sanchez, Jones, and Freeman used their art to create 
a womanist intervention that refuted much of the masculinist Black Power rhetoric 
promoted by their male comrades by expanding who was included in the resistance 
movement. Their efforts, and those of other Black women activists of the era, laid the 
groundwork for Black women to lead the Black liberation struggle of today. Indeed, 
the Black Lives Matter movement cofounders Alicia Garza, Opal Tometi, and Patrisse 
Khan-Cullors use their more inclusive vision of Black liberation within their movement 
principles. Khan-Cullors recognizes this profound legacy in her memoir When They Call 
You a Terrorist: A Black Lives Matter Memoir (2017). Khan-Cullors and journalist Asha 
Bandele write: “We do this work today because on another day work was done by 
Assata Shakur, Angela Davis, Miss Major, the Black Panther Party, the members of the 
Black Arts Movement, SNCC, the RNA, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Ella Baker, 
and so many others. We owe you and the world a debt of gratitude.”24 In recognizing 
that none of us are free until all of us are free, the Black Lives Matter movement attempts 
to realize its vision of centering the most marginalized voices within Black communi-
ties. Garza, Tometi, and Khan-Cullors write that “[w]e affirm the lives of Black queer 
and trans folks, disabled folks, undocumented folks, folks with records, women, and 
all Black lives along the gender spectrum. Our network centers those who have been
marginalized within Black liberation movements.”25 Rather than perpetuate Black Power 
rhetoric that reduces Black liberation to the acquisition of “manhood,” the Black Lives 
Matter movement locates Black liberation at the nexus of intersectional struggle, and 
in so doing, creates space to revalue the sanctity of all Black lives (fig. 3).
Guns and Bitches: Sonia Sanchez’s Womanist Intervention
Sanchez’s revolutionary drama The Bronx Is Next anticipates and actively sets the 
groundwork for contemporary Black (women) activists and organizers. The Bronx Is 
Next presents a group of young revolutionaries—Charles, Roland, Larry, and Jimmy—on 
the streets of Harlem, initiating a reverse migration South. As they gather residents to 
burn down their tenement houses, they converse with an elderly woman who refuses to 
abandon her belongings, a young mother named Black Bitch, and an empathetic White 
Cop who solicits sex from Black Bitch. Through their interactions, Sanchez refutes the 
criminalization of Black men, condemns white-authored shootings of Black men, and 
promotes Black gun ownership. However, Sanchez adds complexity to Black political 
thought through her scathing critique of performative white allyship and hegemonic 
masculinity within the Black liberation struggle. Yet The Bronx Is Next ultimately argues 
for a more radical vision of Black liberation founded upon strong Black families, with 
Black men and women working together in love, unity, and mutual respect.
The Bronx Is Next reflects the political concerns and debates that were happening 
among Black communities in Harlem. Upon the closure of BART/S in 1965, Sanchez 
left Harlem and moved to the San Francisco Bay area to teach alongside Baraka, Sarah 
Webster Fabio, Ed Bullins, and Marvin X at San Francisco State College. Along with 
helping organizers and student activists establish the first Black studies program in 
the United States, Sanchez published her first play, The Bronx Is Next, which premiered 
at Theatre Black (New York) in 1970.26 The Bronx Is Next dramatizes the Republic of 
New Afrika’s (1968–present) vision of establishing an independent Black nation in five 
US Southern states: Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. 
According to Sanchez, the Nation of Islam had already purchased land in the South, 
and revolutionary leaders had begun endorsing burning down tenement houses as a 
way of securing livable public housing.27 Elizabeth Hinton writes that securing safe 
and habitable public housing was a significant concern of this era, as “the cycle of 
police violence and Black rebellion in the late 1960s and early 1970s often started in, 
and consumed, public housing areas.”28 The Bronx Is Next takes audiences directly to 
this battleground: the streets of Harlem.
The Bronx Is Next exposes the everyday occurrences of white men policing, assaulting, 
and killing Black people through the character Jimmy. During the process of removing 
tenants, Jimmy turns to his cadre and states: “Do you know that jest yesterday I was 
running down my ghetto street and these two white dudes stopped me and asked 
what I was doing out so early in the morning—and cuz I was high off some smoke—I 
said man—it’s my street—I can walk on it any time. And they grabbed me and told me 
where everything was.”29 Similar to the Black men in Arm Yourself, Jimmy describes a 
situation in which he found himself a potential victim of white male-authored violence 
(“And they grabbed me and told me where everything was”). Although Black people 
are often socialized to behave in a submissive manner when approached by white men, 
“smoke” dulled Jimmy’s sense of danger, making his behavior anything but compli-
ant. By asserting his manhood and staking a claim to “his” street (or Black communal 
spaces), Jimmy ran afoul with “two white dudes.” He does not distinguish whether 
they are white police officers or white vigilantes, suggesting that perhaps they are the 
same. While Jimmy lived to tell his tale, this was not the case for generations of Black 
Americans who experienced a similar form of white terrorism.30
The Bronx Is Next also reveals the dangers of performative white allyship through 
White Cop’s interactions with the revolutionaries. When Charles blames “a difference 
in color” for hindering Black social mobility, White Cop responds: “Poverty of the 
mind and spirit. Why? Things are so much better. All it takes is a little more effort 
from you people. But these riots. It’s making good people have second thoughts about 
everything.”31 As one of the “good people,” White Cop implies that he counts himself
among the white liberals who support greater equality. However, his misguided speech 
ignores the impact of institutional white racism and instead blames lack of willpower 
as the contributing factor for poverty within Black communities. He also polices the 
tone the Black activists use, suggesting a “right” and “wrong” way to protest shootings. 
Rebelling in the streets—one of the few spaces Black people can occupy—is deemed 
unacceptable for his white liberal sensibilities.
Sanchez continues to explore the limits of white allyship through a surreal reenact-
ment of white-authored gun violence. After Jimmy shares his experience, the revolu-
tionaries convince White Cop to pretend to be a Black man running through the streets 
of Harlem. The revolutionaries, acting as white police officers, stop and interrogate 
White Cop for stealing:
This scene demonstrates an imbalance of power consistent with real life: most every-
day Black citizens do not wield guns, whereas police officers surely do. As a newly 
rendered Black man, White Cop fails to understand that possession of firearms deter-
mines the outcome of events, leaving unarmed Black civilians at the mercy of armed 
police officers. Vocalizing the illegality of racial profiling (that is, Black people steal) 
and his rights as a citizen only provoke more violence. As a newly minted Black man, 
White Cop has not been socialized to understand that “racial profiling is based on . . . 
the potential threat caused by African American men’s bodies.”33 Therefore the simple 
act of bodily movement results in “white” men drawing their guns. Now fearing for 
his life, White Cop pleads, “I’m ready to stop—I’m tired.”34 Of course, Black people 
are also “tired” of police shootings and want to eradicate all forms of white-authored 
violence, but this has yet to happen. The revolutionaries disregard White Cop’s desire 
to “stop” and restore normative hierarchies of power. Instead, they emasculate White 
Cop, calling him a “nigger boy” as they whip him with their guns. Through this role 
reversal and pistol-whipping, the revolutionaries assert their masculinity and reveal 
another painful truth: white allies would never willingly choose to be a Black person 
in America and face gun violence for doing something as simple as running.
Sanchez’s womanist intervention supports Black male agency and gun ownership, 
but critiques the revolutionaries’ limited vision of both Black masculinity and Black 
liberation through their treatment of Black Bitch. When Black Bitch refuses to join their 
trek South, Charles asserts his “manhood” by kissing her and declaring: “I could fuck 
you right here if I wanted to. You know what a Black man is don’t you bitch? Is that 
what happens when you fuck faggoty white men?”35 At this moment, Charles reifies 
hegemonic masculinity and, in so doing, maintains the structures that marginalize 
Black women, girls, trans, queer, and gender-nonconforming people within Black com-
munities. Black Bitch questions Charles’s patriarchal notions of control and dominance: 
“I know what I am . . . But all you revolutionaries or nationalists or whatever you 
call yourselves—do you know where you at? I am a Black woman and I’ve had Black 
men who could not love me or my Black boys—where you gonna find Black women 
to love you when all this is over—when you need them?”36 Rather than listen to her 
concerns, the so-called revolutionaries beat and humiliate her, silencing her in order 
to clear the way for their vision of Black liberation. The irony is that by exploiting her 
vulnerability, the revolutionaries do not treat Black Bitch any differently than White 
Cop. Discarded by the revolutionaries, Black Bitch and her children remain alone, poor, 
and vulnerable to white-authored violence.
authored violence can happen at any time, anywhere, for any “reason.” In other words, 
Black lives are neither valued nor protected in this country. Sanchez affirmed this belief 
during our 2010 interview in her home in Philadelphia: “The thing about these plays: 
they were reflecting what was going on in the world, but at the same time we were 
also making a statement about it too. It’s still happening today. Young Blacks get killed 
constantly if they’re out at a certain time of night. If you’re a Black person—especially 
a male—you cannot be out on the streets of any major city not knowing where you’re 
going to. If you do, you die.”37 Long before technology could record the dangers of 
“running while Black,” Sanchez used her craft for bearing witness to this problem. 
The more recent shooting of Ahmaud Arbery serves as a stark reminder that running 
through the streets remains just as dangerous for Black men today as it was in 1968.38
Finally, The Bronx Is Next provides a warning for contemporary Black activists to 
beware of self-appointed white allies and those who would try to define the limits 
of Black liberation. While White Cop does not utter the phrase “peaceful protest,” I 
cannot help but consider how his speech resonates with the debates I witnessed in 
the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement demonstrations during the summer of 
2020. I read numerous social media posts from liberal white friends, politicians, and 
celebrities, which all essentially stated, “Police shootings are terrible, but destroying 
property is just as bad.” These comments lead me to surmise that for some, property 
holds as much value as Black life. Furthermore, Black activists must recognize the needs 
of the most vulnerable populations—Black mothers, sex workers, and so on. If we fail 
to recognize our own humanity, specialness, and right to exist, how can we possibly 
get the nation to see, say, and understand that Black Lives Matter?
A Black Girl Shall Lead Them: Lola E. Jones’s Womanist Intervention
Jones’s The New Nigger, or Who’s Afraid of William Faulkner also engages with Black 
political debates of the time, using satire to reveal the dangers of not imagining Black 
liberation beyond what white men define as “success.” In so doing, Jones reveals 
the absurdity of Black male bravado and makes the deadly serious argument that if
Black men continue to ignore the concerns of Black women and girls, the revolution 
is bound to fail.
The New Nigger serves as a counterargument to Nobel Prize–winner William 
Faulkner’s infamous commentary about racial integration and white-male gun culture. 
During his 1956 interview with journalist Russell Warren Howe, Faulkner remarked: 
“The South is armed for revolt. After the Supreme Court decision [of May 17, 1954, on 
school integration] you couldn’t get as much as a few rounds for a deer rifle in Mis-
sissippi. The gunsmiths were sold out. These white people will accept another Civil 
War knowing they’re going to lose.”39 Later, Faulkner admits that although he would 
prefer navigating the “middle of the road,” he would “fight for Mississippi against 
the United States even if it meant going out into the street and shooting Negroes.”40 
Faulkner uses “South” and “Mississippi” as dog-whistle terms for the Southern white 
men who fear and resist integration as ardently as their ancestors feared and resisted 
emancipation. Responding to this perceived Black threat, everyday white men took 
up arms, endowing themselves with the power to kill Black people. Faulkner suggests 
that the answer to white terrorism lies in giving white men “time” to come to terms 
with integration: “Give him time—don’t force us. . . . Things have been getting bet-
ter slowly for a long time. Only six Negroes were killed by whites in Mississippi last 
year, according to the police figures.”41 The absurdity of phrases such as “things are 
getting better,” “only six Negroes were killed by whites,” and “police records” were 
not lost on Black intellectuals of the time. James Baldwin famously counterargued 
that one Black death at the hands of whites was too many, questioned the accuracy 
of police accounts, and insisted that many Southern Black men were not “afraid of 
changing the status quo.”42 The New Nigger supports Baldwin’s counterargument, 
demonstrating that Southern Blacks are not “afraid” of the world’s Faulkners or white 
male vigilantes. The New Nigger depicts Southern Black men ready to take up arms in 
pursuit of racial integration.
At the time of the play’s publication, the racial integration of public schools had been 
in effect for twenty years. As a professor at the historically Black university Morgan 
State and having taught English in her hometown of Norfolk, Virginia (1954–62), Char-
lottesville (1962–63), and Baltimore (1963–67), Jones had experienced the consequences 
of Brown v. Board of Education (1954). While there is little evidence to suggest The New 
Nigger was produced, Jones clearly wanted audiences to consider several key questions: 
Was integration the most viable solution to counteract white terrorism? Did integration 
liberate Black people, including Black women and girls? What fundamental changes 
are still needed to liberate all Black people?43 Ultimately, the play answers these and 
other questions with a call to redefine the meaning of Black liberation.
Similar to Sanchez, Jones’s womanist intervention condemns white-authored shoot-
ings of Black people and exposes detrimental behaviors that weaken the Black liberation 
struggle. However, Jones deviates from Sanchez’s method of critique in her use of satire 
to expose the dangers of hegemonic masculinity and exclusive Black male leadership.
Described by Jones as “a play on racism in American society,” The New Nigger uses a 
play-within-a-play structure, humor, and other self-referencing devices to encourage 
collective action from the Black community.44 The play opens with a violent scene of 
Black rebellion drawn from the imagination of a young artist named Young Black. 
Young Black writes, directs, and stars in the production as the charismatic, yet highly 
incompetent and sexist Southern leader named Reverend Freeman. Jones uses Young 
Black’s production as a metaphor for the Black revolution, asking, “who writes the 
Black man’s script?”45 The New Nigger suggests that to “direct” a successful revolution, 
Black male activists must decenter hegemonic masculinity and work with Black women 
and girls to strategize viable solutions to white-authored shootings.
As with the revolutionaries in The Bronx Is Next, Young Black believes himself com-
mitted to Black liberation, but ultimately obstructs the cause by failing to envision 
revolution as anything more than mob violence. Jones’s stage directions describe Young 
Black’s vision of Black rebellion:
In Young Black’s vision, aggressive, militaristic, and racialized violence reigns. In this 
moment of chaos, Young Black does not provide audiences context for why the uprising 
is happening, the objective of the rebellion, or any sense of organizational leadership. 
I can only surmise that Young Black’s dramatization would not inspire audiences to 
take similar action against police shootings. Later, Jones reveals the fallacy of Young 
Black’s vision of Black liberation when he performs the role of Reverend Freeman, the 
man responsible for leading this rebellion during “The Niggers’ March” to the Georgia 
state capitol building.
Reverend Freeman’s ridiculous Black Power rhetoric centers on achieving hegemonic 
masculinity, and in so doing fails to promote any real sociopolitical change. During his 
sermon, he agitates for the right to visit the same beaches, parks, nightspots, and bars 
as white men.47 He tells his enthusiastic male congregants: “Right now, we aim to enjoy 
what has been denied us for hundreds of years. We aim to eat, sleep and drink where 
our white brother has eaten, slept and drunk for - lo - these thousand years.”48 Reverend 
Freeman conceptualizes Black liberation as Black men achieving the same “success” 
as white men (that is, the ability to enjoy the same leisurely activities). He concludes 
his impassioned speech with the rallying cry: “CLOSE THE SCHOOLS. CLOSE THE
WITH EDUCATION!”49 As a lifelong educator, Jones clearly supported educational 
opportunities for Black youth. Her decision to have a Black artist create an image of
a preacher—traditionally seen as a leader within Black communities—decry educa-
tion and promote the acquisition of white men’s leisurely activities issues a call for a 
radical revisioning of Black liberation. Jones ironizes Reverend Freeman’s rallying cry 
through a counterargument presented by a timid Black girl.
Meek Young Voice, later identified as Little Sister, challenges Reverend Freeman’s 
leadership and masculinist vision of liberation by asking a series of questions at the 
conclusion of his speech. She asks: “What about schools and colleges, sir? . . . Ain’t they 
important? Ain’t we gonna fight to go there, too? I mean, ain’t they just as important 
as . . . as the night spot?”50 Before Little’s Sister’s questions, Black male congregants 
dominated the dramatized Black nationalist debate, with Black women only occasion-
ally interjecting “Amen” or other similar affirmations. Reverend Freeman responds to 
Little Sister’s queries, stating that “schools and colleges will come to us in due time.”51 
Borrowing from Faulkner’s plea for more “time,” he dismisses her justifiable concerns 
and continues with his plans.
Ultimately, Young Black’s vision of Black liberation does not include the concerns of 
women and girls, resulting in an asinine call-to-arms. However, Little Sister’s poignant 
questions position Black women and girls as more than capable of leading the revolution.
Freeman’s The Suicide also privileges Black women’s subjectivity without in any 
way negating concern for the collective well-being of all of Black America. The Suicide 
allows audiences to witness a Black woman’s devastation brought on by the extra-
legal murder of her intellectual husband. Freeman draws from Black women’s anti-
lynching playwriting tradition, centering the struggle for citizenship through Wife’s 
experiences. Koritha Mitchell writes, “because lynching plays reflect and encourage 
community conversation, the emergence of the Black mother/wife as a central figure 
registers the degree to which her experiences informed discussions of Black identity 
and citizenship.”52 Jones draws from this genre, using the typical one-act structure, the 
image of a devastated Black widow, the terror of a white-authored home invasion, and 
denial of Black citizenship to reveal the injustice of US laws. However, in centering the 
pain of Black widowhood, Freeman also considers the failures of Black clergymen and 
the need to redefine Black liberation as the survival of the Black family.
The Suicide takes place in a hot, filthy, and cramped rented apartment in an unidenti-
fied city. The sparse set includes a bed, religious paraphernalia, and a closed casket. 
The one-act play begins with Neighbor pressing Wife for more information about the 
suspicious death of her husband, Frank Jones. As the conversation unfolds, audiences 
learn that Frank could not drive a car, yet managed to travel a far distance to commit 
suicide on a bridge where a thousand other Black men have also mysteriously died. 
Neighbor reports: “Newspapers jus’ say he jumped, nombah some thousan’ jumped 
from the bridge, didn’t hardly say much mo’.”53 Suspicion of foul play intensifies when 
Wife reveals that Frank was “railly a good man, ’cept readin’ o-all them books, and
drankin’ so much wine done rumn him crazy.”54 Frank’s intelligence and alcohol use 
likely lowered his inhibitions, making him more outspoken and therefore a target for 
white male violence. Lacking a gun, Frank met his gruesome end at a bridge, where 
neither his devotion to God nor love of books offered protection. When Preacher—a 
“pompous man”—enters Wife’s apartment under the guise of fulfilling his “Christian 
duty,” he does not offer a prayer for Frank’s soul nor question the circumstances of 
his death.55 Instead, he simply stares at Frank’s lynched body and stands idly by as 
Wife receives a beating from white police officers.
The Black Church has functioned as a powerful force for organizing Black resistance 
to white-authored violence, but it has also perpetuated white, middle-class ideologies 
that harm vulnerable members within the Black community, including women, non-
binary, and LGBTQ+ folk. Historically, Black clergymen have concerned themselves 
with the spiritual needs of their congregations. Many more have also led the masses 
in protest against racial oppression, functioning as spiritual advisors, civic activists, 
and political leaders within their communities. Black clergymen and their congrega-
tions have cultivated a politics of respectability—a form of racial uplift ideology that 
includes a concern for public appearance and the adoption of Victorian mores—in the 
hope of gaining white acceptance. “From its position of authority, the Black Church 
has shown strong support for the patriarchal family, claiming that men should be the 
heads of the church, that women should not be preachers, and that men should rule 
their families,” writes Collins.56 Jones’s apolitical Preacher embodies this popular con-
servative politics, caring more for the appearance of respectability than for galvanizing 
the Black community to agitate for social justice.
Freeman condemns conservative Black clergymen who fail to mourn with Black 
women and seek justice for all forms of white-authored violence. In The Suicide, 
Preacher’s longing to view Frank’s corpse supersedes his sacred responsibility to mourn 
with Wife. Audiences learn that Preacher has never visited the Jones’s home and is, in 
fact, a stranger to them. Having read a report of Frank’s “suicide” in the newspaper, 
Preacher insists he has arrived to offer a prayer. Once seated, Preacher remains silent 
until Wife offers to let him view Frank’s body. Preacher responds, “Don’t mind if I 
do,” as casually as if he were accepting refreshments.57 Upon viewing Frank’s lynched 
body, Preacher stares in horror. Had he moved beyond voyeurism and fulfilled his 
Christian duty, Preacher might have helped her put together the suspicious circum-
stances of Frank’s supposed “suicide.” However, as a voyeur of Black trauma porn, 
Preacher says nothing to alleviate Wife’s suffering and does nothing to incite justice.
The Suicide uses Wife’s traumatic experiences during Frank’s wake to condemn 
state-sanctioned violence against Black women. After a street fight between Wife and 
a neighbor draws the attention of white police officers, she reenters her apartment 
sporting a bruised eye, torn dress, and disheveled hair. Spectators are left to wonder if 
her injuries are the result of her participation in the street fight or of the police officers’ 
violence. The officers investigate the street fight, entering Wife’s home, interrogate the 
mourners, mishandle Wife, and make lewd comments about Black women’s sexual-
ity. The officers’ invasion of Wife’s home reflects the painful reality that Black women 
have never been safe inside their own homes.58 The officers embody a sadistic joy in 
terrorizing Wife in her home, a morbid tradition which traces back to the Jim Crow 
era.59 When the officers open Frank’s coffin against Wife’s wishes and she demands 
they close the coffin to prevent flies from eating his body, Second Cop handles her 
roughly and hauls her off to jail for “resisting arrest.” Wife’s experience of loss, assault, 
and unwarranted arrest—compounded by Preacher’s inaction—reinforces Malcolm X’s 
famous 1962 speech in which he declared: “the most disrespected person in America is 
the Black woman.”60 Indeed, in the course of a single day, Wife has lost her husband, 
witnessed no justice for his murder, been prevented from mourning him, and lost her 
rights of citizenship as she joins the prison population.
Ultimately, Freeman’s tragic tale raises several vital questions for Black spectators to 
consider: Do Black clergymen have a responsibility to seek justice for the state-sanctioned 
murder of Black people? How can Black communities ensure their fundamental rights 
as US citizens and protect Black women from state-sanctioned violence? Does Black 
gun ownership offer a solution to extralegal murders of Black people? Regardless of 
the answer, Frank’s murder reflects a grim reality: we will never know what actu-
ally happened to thousands of Black men and women activists who were murdered 
or simply vanished during the Jim Crow and civil rights eras. The Suicide implicitly 
urges spectators to defend Black women and families and demand accountability for 
these murders.
The revolutionary spirit of The Suicide resonated with the political impulses of Black 
student activists at Northwestern University. The Suicide premiered at Black Folks’s 
Theatre, the artistic branch of the Black student union aptly named For Members Only, 
in 1971.61 Inspired by Teer’s theories of performance, Black Folks’s Theatre members 
defined themselves as “liberators” who used theatre to educate, heal, and galvanize 
the Black Chicagoland community.62 Student activists realized their vision in 1971 with 
“The Black Portrait,” an event that included productions of The Suicide, Sanchez’s Sister 
Son/ji (1969), and Jimmy Garrett’s We Own the Night (1968). While archival records do 
not explain why Black Folks’s Theatre selected The Suicide, I surmise that the image 
of a mutilated Black man resting in an open casket would have evoked memories of 
the murder of 14-year-old Chicago native Emmett Till. Several years prior to the pro-
duction, a white store owner and his half-brother abducted Till from his great-uncle’s 
home in Mississippi. They proceeded to beat, mutilate, and shoot Till in the head 
before throwing his body into the Tallahatchie River for allegedly making physical 
and verbal advances on the store owner’s wife. Till’s murderers were exonerated but 
later admitted their guilt.63 Till’s murder and the initial acquittal of his murderers 
galvanized the nation to action. The Black Folks’s Theatre production captured this 
history, which continues today.
Echoing this terrible history, 17-year-old Trayvon Martin was also hunted, shot, and 
killed by a vigilante while walking back from a convenience store in Florida. Afterward, 
Martin’s murderer admitted guilt, was acquitted, and received financial benefits by 
auctioning the gun used in the murder. Similar to Till’s, Martin’s murder has become 
a galvanizing force in the contemporary Black freedom struggle.
Unfortunately, The Suicide remains just as relevant, as Black lynchings ruled suicide 
persist. The summer of 2020, in particular, invoked the memory of Billie Holiday’s 
Black protest song “Strange Fruit” (1939). Social media exploded with accounts of Black 
men found hanging in trees across the country. These victims include Malcolm Harsch, 
Dominique Alexander, Robert Fuller, and a 17-year-old boy from Texas. “Authorities 
say that all these deaths appear to be suicides, with no signs of foul play. But family 
members of the deceased, protestors and activists, and some scholars of anti-Black 
violence are intuitively suspicious about those conclusions,” writes journalist Stacey 
Patton.64 Harsch’s sister, for example, remains suspicious of the suicide ruling. “My 
brother is 6’3. That tree was four feet. My brother was tied to a tree with an HDMI 
cord. Someone took their time with that knot,” explains Harmonie Harsch.65 In addi-
tion to the skepticism of Harsch, Black activists and scholars also remain doubtful of 
the ruling, in part because Black suicides are often misclassified.66 Psychologists Alex 
Crosy and Sherry Davis Molock write:
By this definition, an alarmingly high number of Black homicides are brought on by 
behaviors that create their own death. Unfortunately, behaviors deemed “risky” for 
Black people, such as jogging, are everyday leisure activities for most other communities.
Furthermore, Preacher’s preoccupation with Frank’s corpse mirrors today’s fascina-
tion with the grotesque spectacle of Black death. The use of dashcams and cell phones
have allowed everyday people to bear witness to white-authored violence. However, 
the footage of actual shootings of Black people also allows anyone to watch Black 
deaths from the comfort of their homes. While this footage has galvanized activists 
to action and in some cases used as evidence against perpetrators, the frequency and 
casual nature of such viewings also run the risk of stripping us of our humanity and 
normalizing our deaths.
Conclusion
From Baraka’s perspective, police officers used excessive force and failed to detect 
actual crime. Instead, they became judges, jury, and executioners, inflicting violence on 
those they pledged to serve and protect. While experiences such as this demonstrate 
the longstanding need to reform or defund the police, his story also offers a beacon of 
hope. In Baraka’s most desperate circumstances—when he thought he would surely 
die—it was the Black community of Newark that protected him. They did so by bear-
ing witness to the crime and actively participating in his struggle, demonstrating how 
crucial collective action is to our survival as a people (fig. 4).
Collective action starts with recognizing that none of us are free until all of us are 
free. For this reason, I urge Black artists and activists to answer Charlene Carruthers’s 
call to embrace Black queer feminist praxis as a tool of empowerment. Founded upon 
the theories and practices of Black feminist and LGBTQ+ activists, Black queer feminist 
praxis fosters the liberation of all Black people, regardless of gender, sexuality, age, 
class, and so forth by allowing “people and groups to bring their full selves into the 
process of dismantling all systems of oppression.”69 Carruthers writes that by using this 
lens, “we can more effectively prioritize problems and methods that center historically 
marginalized people in our communities.”70 As the revolutionary theatre of the Black 
Arts Movement can attest, the theatre has served as a powerful tool to disseminate 
such calls. We must do more to support the efforts of Black artists and activists who 
answer this call today.
Analyzing the more recent past serves as an important reminder that many of the 
gains made by Black activists and their allies have been systematically dismantled 
following the Black Power era. For example, many of the Black theatres founded dur-
ing this era suffered financially in the waning years, with some closing long before
the crippling impact of the 2020 global pandemic. How can historically Black theatres
foster the next generation of artists and offer strategies to eradicate white-authored
affirmative action policies. Black activists and their allies also fought to put Black history 
and culture back on the world stage, creating the first Black studies program at San 
Francisco State College in 1968. Juanita remembers the program offering free courses
to educate Black community members. Unfortunately, the practice “got co-opted,”
exemplified by the fact that today, Black studies courses reside behind the gates of the 
ivory tower, firmly out of reach for many Black people.71
The erosion of civil rights protections, coupled with the ever-present threat of white 
male-authored shootings, attests to the urgent need to foster Black art and activism at 
every level of society. To put this in plain terms: the energy used to fuel the (mostly) 
white mob that stormed the US Capitol building on January 6, 2020, is the same energy 
that hung a noose around Black women and men a century ago. The energy that fuels 
anti-Black violence has never gone away, because in all situations—to hearken to the 
sentiments of Patricia Young—the perpetrators saw themselves as “agents to their white 
peers.”72 They were confident that as executioners of “justice,” they would avoid any 
accountability for their actions. We have lost generations of Black artists and activists 
to the everyday, less-sensationalized occurrence of white-authored shootings. Their 
premature deaths have had a profound impact on the lives of many, myself included.
Having survived abject poverty and gun violence in one of the wealthiest countries 
in the world, I now ask: How can Black activists and their allies use theatre as a tool to 
further Black liberation? The Black Arts Movement empowered everyday Black people 
to take action and promote a cultural revolution that would redefine what it means 
to be human. I hope that twenty-first-century Black activists and their allies will learn 
from these efforts and create art that engages the masses and fosters the inclusive aims 
of the Black Lives Matter movement. I stand as a witness that if we continue to lose 
the gains made from their activism, we will see another generation of Black youth lost 
to incarceration and death.
