Title:
Meritorious Heroes: Allegorical Hawk Paintings in Yuan China 
and Early Chos?n Korea
Abstract:
Abstract: This study explores the allegor cal usage of hawk painting to praise a hero with meritorious 
deeds in Yuan China (1271–1368) and early Chos?n Korea (1392–1910). Through an analysis of 
Yuan-dynasty poems inscribed on hawk paintings, this article demonstrates that paintings of a hawk 
sit ing still on a tree in the woods con eyed the allegory of a hero subdu ng wily beings, such as rabbits 
and foxes. Moreover, Yuan paint ngs of a hawk and a bear (yingxiong ??) employed a Chinese rebus 
and represented the animals as heroes, comparing them to historical heroic and loyal figures. This 
article then turns to Chos?n Korea, where two types of hawk paint ngs reflected the Korean recep ion 
of Yuan coun erparts. One was the paint ng of a hawk sit ing still, which indi ated the hero’s read ness 
for future achievements. Another, with the motif of a rabbit caught in the hawks talons, emphasized 
the heros successful achievements and gained popularity through the late Chos?n dynasty. The Chi-
nese and Korean allegories of heroic contributions emerged in response to complicated politics, as 
the Yuan government comprised multiple ethnic groups and the early Ming and early Chos?n were 
newly established after the fall of previous dynasties. For the same reason, the hawk-hero allegory 
began to lose its relevance over time, and hawk paint ngs came to take on rather mundane mean ngs.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 The Allegory Developed and Established in Yuan China
 The Allegory Received and Transformed in Early Chos?n Korea
 After the Allegory of Meritorious Hero
 Conclusion


Text:
----------------------
Hawks were among the types of birds most favored as subjects for painting in 
premodern China and Korea.1 The hawk was seen as wise, with attentive quali­
ties related to its ability to spy prey clearly from a great distance and react swiftly. 
Various hawk images were continuously developed throughout the long history 
of the domestication of hawks as ideal hunting companions for the ruling classes 
in East Asia.2 These images can be classified roughly into two types: a hawk that 
belongs to a skilled owner sitting on a gorgeously decorated perch or on the arm 
of the well­dressed owner going out to hunt; and a hawk in the wild, perched on 
the branch of a tree in a forest or fiercely pursuing prey. Both types exhibited the 
hawk’s robust power and heroic demeanor, attracting male viewers who sought to 
assert their physical or political power.
Instead of representing the hawk in its purely natural appearance, many 
paintings portrayed the bird instead within a deliberately devised image to 
convey power as the prime example of strength from the ornithological per­
spec ive or as the emblem for the owners of the paintings, most of whom were 
politically influential people. Hawk paintings in China and Korea almost 
always referred to supreme power and ability through their allegories or met­
aphors, which changed their meaning according to a particular political or 
social climate. Hawk painting was in fact a type of Chinese rebus painting that 
alluded to hidden meanings (Bai 2016).3
Several studies have yielded signifi cant findings regarding Chinese and 
Korean hawk paintings. Houmei Sung (1995, 2009: 7–38), a leading researcher 
in traditional Chinese animal painting, traced the depictions of hawks and their 
meanings across the expanse of Chinese painting history. Sung identified the fol­
lowing four types of hawk depic ion: the tame and the wild hawk during the Tang 
dynasty (618–907); popularized images of the hawk chasing its prey during the 
Song dynasty (960–1279); the hawk as two kinds of satirical metaphors referring to 
the Mongols during the Yuan dynasty (1271–1368); and creative themes in hawk 
paintings from the Ming court (1368–1644). Although her research outlined the 
extensive history of Chinese hawk painting and provoked interest in decipher­
ing the hidden codes of animal paintings in East Asia, its focus was primarily 
on the Ming court and the unique and unprecedented creativity of Ming court 
painters. Another outstanding study on Chinese hawk painting is by Richard M. 
Barnhart, who suggested that the hawks portrayed by Bada Shanren ???? 
(ca. 1626–1705) in the Qing dynasty expressed the painter’s defiant spirit against 
the Kangxi emperor (Wang and Barnhart 1990: 86–91).4 Some hawk paintings have 
also become the subject of studies by multiple scholars offering differing views. My 
previous research has dealt with Chinese and Korean hawk paintings and brought 
attention to two aspects. The first was that depictions of ostentatious hawks belong­
ing to Chinese emperors celebrated the sovereign’s power, as evidenced in the long 
line of hawk portraits from the seventh to the eighteenth century in China. The 
hawk represented in these paintings was a fast white hawk, indispensable to the 
diplomatic relationship between Korea and China. Korean kings paid various kinds 
of tribute to Chinese emperors, who often preferred the coveted white hawks since 
at least the seventh century (Kho 2012). The second aspect was the supernatural 
func ion of hawk paintings based on a belief in their magical power; this aspect 
persisted through the late Ming, Qing, and late Chos?n periods (Kho 2013).
These previous studies were insufficient in understanding the historical con­
text and interregional flows of hawk paintings. This article expands on them by 
examining Yuan dynasty hawk paintings in more depth and by delving into hawk 
paintings from the unstudied early Chos?n period, thus providing a more com­
prehensive history of the genre. Although most of the early Chos?n works are not 
extant today and only a few from the Yuan period survive, investigation of these 
early hawk paintings is possible through contemporaneous textual sources.
The Allegory Developed and Established in Yuan China
Houmei Sung’s pioneering study of Yuan dynasty hawk paintings has inspired 
new ideas about the genre (Sung 1995: 50–55; 2009: 11–14). Sung analyzed two 
works to explain that Yuan hawk paintings included satirical metaphors to express
internal resistance against the Mongolian government. In Hawk Chasing a Huamei 
(Yingzhuhuamei ????; fig. 1), the hawk, representing a barbarian Mongol, 
harasses a bird with beautiful eyebrows, which stands for an accomplished Chi­
nese scholar. In Dark Green Paulownia, Bamboo, and a Haw (Cangwuzhuying ??
??; fig. 2), the hawk indicates a lofty scholar who has withdrawn from worldly 
affairs, like a Chinese scholar in retreat from the Mongol invasions.
Hawk Chasing a Huamei (fig. 1) by the Yuan court painter Wang Yuan ?? 
(fl. late thirteenth–early fourteenth century) bears five poetic inscriptions from 
late Yuan that primarily describe the scene of a brave hawk and the huamei bird.6 
Sung considers the hawk to symbolize a Mongol invader on the basis that one of the 
inscriptions, by Du Yuncheng ??? (dates unknown), uses the word huying ?? 
(literally, “barbarian hawk”) to designate it. However, the word huying frequently 
appeared in sources ranging from Tang China to Chos?n Korea, where it simply 
meant a brave hawk in a positive sense.7 Furthermore, the inscriptions show sympa­
thy toward the huamei and do not necessarily criticize the hawk. One of the inscrib­
ers, Ban Weizhi ??? (1275–1349), writing in the largest and clearest handwriting 
in the upper left corner, praised the excellence of the hawk for its distinguished ser­
vice, comparing it with the character of the huamei that caused its unfortunate fate.8 
Likewise, another inscriber, the Ming scholar Chen Jiru ??? (1558–1639), who 
had read all five annotations, discussed how the theme of the painting related to a 
particular historical moment from the early Song dynasty.9 Regarding the image, the 
Yuan and Ming annotators seem to have shared sympathy for the huamei. Rather 
than rebuking the hawk, however, they appreciated the hawk’s strength and ability.
Sung’s example for the second type of Yuan hawk paintings is Zhang 
Shunzi’s ??? (fl. early fourteenth century) Dark Green Paulownia, Bamboo, 
and a Hawk (fig. 2), which depicts a hawk sitting alone in the trees of paulownia 
and bamboo. Sung cites a phrase from the painter’s inscription in the upper left 
corner—“ordinary eagles had an appetite only for the flesh of their prey”—and 
explains that the hawk that despises such regular hawks is a symbol of a reclusive 
Chinese scholar under the Mongol’s rule.
However, the phrase merely indicates the hawk’s lofty spirit. Another 
inscription in the upper right corner by Sa Dadao ??? (dates unknown) points 
us to a new direction for interpretation:
These lines portray the hawk staring far into space with its attentive, piercing eyes, 
overpowering other wild animals and bringing peace to the forest. Thus, the hawk 
here anthropomorphizes not a reclusive scholar but, rather, a competent inspector 
or military person who success ully performs his duties. This painting was then a 
different type of Yuan hawk painting that incorporated the allegory of a magnifi ­
cent, heroic hawk.
The allegory of a heroic hawk is most evident in three poems by Yuan schol­
ars that appear in a collec ion of poems inscribed on paintings.10 These three 
poems are “Shanyingtu” ??? (“Painting of Two Hawks”) by Gong Shitai ??? 
(1298–1362), “Ti huaying” ??? (“Inscribed on a Hawk Painting”) by Li Qi ?? 
(active mid­fourteenth century), and “Ti Liu Luchu Suozhang Mo Qingshan Ying” ?
????????? (“Inscribed on a Hawk Painted by Mo Qingshan at the Home 
of Liu Luchu”) by Guo Yu ?? (1316–?), cited below. They describe the hawk in the 
paintings as a hero who can subdue deceptive beings such as rabbits and foxes.
In these poems, rabbits and foxes take on the role of thieves, and the mighty 
hawks righteously inflict justice on them. Gong Shitai explicitly personifies the fox 
and the rabbit as wily and sneaky, respec ively. The motifs of rabbits and foxes were 
not new to the Yuan dynasty but derived from the Tang and Song poetic tradition. 
“Huaying” ?? (“Painting a Hawk”) by the Tang dynasty poet Du Fu describes a 
hawk painting with a rabbit: “[A hawk] stands poised, trained on a sneaky rabbit” 
(?????; Quantangshi ???, 224:10a). He Ning ?? (898–955), another Tang 
poet, had also written about a hawk and a rabbit in a poem titled “Tiyinjietutu” ?
???? (“Inscribed on a Painting of a Hawk Hunting a Rabbit”): “You may boast 
of the swiftness of the hawk’s eyes, but I feel sorry for the rabbit’s frightened heart” 
(?????, ?????; Yuding lidai tihuashilei ????????, 94:9b). By 
the Song dynasty, the breathless moment of a rabbit scurrying away at the mere glare 
of a hawk had become familiar imagery and appeared repeatedly with the phrase tuqi-
gulou ???? (“when a rabbit jumps, a hawk swoops down upon it”). The phrase 
even came to describe quick and powerful brushstrokes in calligraphy and painting.11
Unlike their precedents, the three Yuan poems describe the hawks as con­
templative yet vigilant, perched motionless on trees and staring out into the sky, 
neither scanning for prey nor hunting. The poems instead focus on the hawk’s 
posture and explain why the hawks in the paintings do not need to hunt because 
they have already subdued the rabbits and foxes. Li Qi clearly indicates the lack 
of foxes and rabbits in the forest that the hawk oversees. The hawk still observes 
its surroundings, prepared to defeat any cunning animals at short notice. Guo Yu 
further defines the world of these animals as being under a “peaceful and pros­
perous age of wise rule,” where people could hear the jiaodua ’s words ??? or
“qilin’s words.”12 The phrase “jiaoduan’s words” appears in the biography of Yelü 
Chucai ???? (1190–1244), a loyal politician under the Mongol ruler Genghis 
Khan.13 When people heard the jiaoduan’s words, Yelü Chucai explained to them 
that it was an auspicious sign. The supposed appearance of such an auspicious 
animal was not a record of fact but acknowledgment and evidence of the ruler’s 
excellent governance. The poets then tried to suggest a world in which the faithful 
hawks and hunters live as if under the peaceful reign of a wise ruler. Overall, the 
three Yuan poems manifest the following allegory: a military general or inspec­
tor general (the hawk) has subjugated all the cunning crowds of corrupt officials 
(the rabbits and foxes) and brought peace to the world (the forest) that is governed 
by a wise ruler (the falconer), but the general is ready to use force when needed.
The allegory was flexible in terms of exhibiting one’s political standing. It is 
possible that the poets were loyal subjects under the Mongol emperor and used the 
allegory to pray for the stability of the empire. But it is also possible that the poets 
used the allegory to express their undying loyalty to the Song. Two of the poets, 
Gong Shitai and Li Qi, were indeed loyal officials under the Mongol emperors. 
Gong became an official in 1327, worked as inspector general, and occupied other 
high positions in the Ministry of War and the Ministry of Interior in the Mongol 
government until he died in 1362. Li Qi was one of the yimin ?? (people remain­
ing from the previous dynasty) who devoted themselves to the Yuan emperor even 
after the collapse of the Yuan dynasty. Adamant that a subject must be loyal to only 
one master, Li renamed himself “Old Man Not of Two Minds” (buerxin laoren ??
???) and rejected the Ming emperor’s invitation to an official post. Li expressed 
his grief when his friend, another yimin, died in battle against the Ming. Gong and 
Li surely indicated their wish for the stability of Yuan governance by extolling gen­
erals and eulogizing the peaceful world under the Yuan emperor.
None of the paintings described by the three poets survives, making it difficult 
for us to obtain a sense of the pictorial image. But we can turn to a couple of extant 
paintings that employ the same allegory of a heroic figure during a peaceful reign. 
Dark Green Paulownia, Bamboo, and a Hawk (fig. 2), as discussed above, depicts a 
hawk sitting in a forest and alludes to a mil tary person maintaining peace. Yellow 
Hawk on an Old Juniper (Huangyingguhuitu ?????; fig. 3) at the Palace Museum 
is another painting that exhibits the allegory. The painting, by Zhang Shunzi and Xue 
Jieweng ??? (fl. mid­fourteenth century), renders a dark amber­colored hawk sit­
ting alone and undisturbed on a perch in the forest. The inscription on the painting 
neither clearly identifies the political standing of the painting’s owner nor describes 
its meaning.14 However, this hawk, with its distinc ive plumage and sharp eyes,15 
communicates that it is a capable hawk of a worthy breed (Purtle 2016); with its 
imposing appearance, it ensures the peace of its world with keen and dignified eyes.
Falcon (Huaying ??) at the Taipei Palace Museum (fig. 4) is an excellent 
example of the hawk­hero allegory.16 Although the painter is unknown, the scroll 
has five poem inscriptions that reveal its func ional meaning. The inscribers from 
the late Yuan and early Ming are Mo Shian ???, Zou Yi ??, Pan Ruoshui ?
??, Yang Quan ??, and Cai You ??.17 They all extol the hawk’s accomplish­
ments as follows:
Although the painting does not depict rabbits or foxes, all the inscribed poems 
mention these sly creatures. The allegory of the hawk as a hero subduing rabbits 
and foxes, then, must have been firmly established by this time. In their appreci­
ation of the hawk as a symbolic expression of the general’s military service, the 
writers also emphasize his time of peace. In particular, Zou Yi’s poem honors the 
brave general for contributing to the establishment of a peaceful world, where a 
phoenix appears. In China the phoenix or fenghuang ?? is an auspicious sign 
for an era of wise rule. By praising the role of the general and its consequences, 
the poets exhibit their own wish to assist the emperor in becoming a great leader.
Chen Yunru ??? (2001) has suggested that the inscriptions by Mo Shian 
and Zou Yi point to a certain Yuan dynasty general as the owner of the painting.19 
The general may be a meritorious figure from the late Yuan, but I would like to 
note the lack of any information in the inscriptions that would help determine the 
exact time the poets refer to. Some of the inscribers worked for the Yuan and also 
held government posts in the early Ming.20 Moreover, a line from one of the poems 
indicates the difficulty of founding a country.21 The painting in question shows 
the hawk agitated, fluffing up its chest, with sharply turned head looking out with 
piercing eyes. The hawk captured at the moment just before spreading its wings 
and taking flight seems to evoke the energy of a new era. We should thus remain 
open to the possibility that the poets could have been writing about a general of 
the early Ming dynasty. Nonetheless, Falcon, with its inscriptions, epitomizes the 
type of hawk painting with the hawk­as­meritorious­hero allegory that emerged 
and developed in the Yuan and continued into the early Ming.
These paintings and the allegory embedded in them were a construction, 
not a faithful representation of reality. First, it was difficult for painters to observe a 
hawk sitting at leisure in nature, let alone to have an opportunity to paint the scene. 
Trained hawks often entered China as political tribute from the northern part of 
Korea or other states. The image of a quiet hawk in nature must have been a compos­
ite picture of a trained hawk and a natural landscape. In other words, painters imag­
ined such a scene and painted it through a rather synthetic process. Yellow Hawk on 
an Old Juniper (fig. 3) is a good example. According to the inscriptions, it involved 
two different painters, one in charge of the bird and the other of the background. 
Second, the political realities of the late Yuan and the early Ming were both chal­
lenging, and complete eradication of “wily ones” was unlikely. The paintings and 
the allegory instead presented an idealized vision and meaning. What led to such 
an idealization and its repetition in poetry? The general, who defeated villains and 
established order in society, played the critical role of a loyal subject to the emperor, 
the ruler of the territory. The act of praising the hawk in the painting for its associa­
tions with military contributions to the peaceful reign was a method for the writer 
to convey his loyal heart and sense of belonging to the peaceful world in a subtle yet 
effective way. The repeated use of the allegory in poems tells us that it had become 
conventional among Yuan dynasty officials. Because the allegory was not specific to 
a particular dynasty, it could easily have been used in the early Ming as well.
Following the hawk­hero allegory, another intriguing and unrealistic sub­
ject of painting developed: the combination of a hawk and a bear, or Yingxiong ?
?. Yingxiong, which literally means “hawk and bear,” is a homonym in Mandarin 
with yingxiong ??, which means “hero.”22 Zhou Tingzhen ??? (b. 1294), who 
tried unsuc ess ully to become an official under the Mongol government, com­
posed a poem about a painting titled “Painting of a Hawk and a Bear Listening to a 
Stream” (“Yingxiong tingjian tu” ?????). Zhou described the two heroic ani­
mals in tranquil repose by a clear stream and explained that a great leader ought 
to pay attention to remonstrance. In his poem, Zhou used tingjian ??, “listening 
to remonstrance,” instead of tingjian ??, or “listening to a stream,” in a homoph­
onous pun similar to yingxiong (Shichuji ???, 14a).
Wang Li ?? (1314–86), a Confucian scholar in the late Yuan, compli­
mented the hawk in a Yingxiong painting as a hero and compared it and the bear 
with two famous historical figures. His essay, “Inscribed on the Painting of a Hawk 
and Bear” (“Ti yingxiong tu” ????), reads:
According to Wang, the painting showed a hawk and a bear poised to fight. Zhang 
Liang and Han Xin, the historical figures compared with the animals, were distin­
guished loyal heroes who contributed to the founding of the Han dynasty and were 
also known to have had entirely different personalities.24 Wang clarifies the mean­
ing of the hawk and the bear by invoking these well­known heroes from history.
“Hawk and bear,” as a theme of heroes, seems to have become popular dur­
ing the late Yuan and the early Ming dynasties for display on the walls of inns in a 
southern city in China. Ch?ng Mongju ??? (1337–92), an official from Kory? 
(918–1392), records an instance of seeing such a painting during his diplomatic mis­
sion to China. In 1386, Ch?ng visited the Tongyang Inn in Jiangsu Province, one of 
the stop­offs for Korean envoys, and saw a hawk­and­bear painting. Upon seeing it, 
he wrote a poem titled “On the Painting of a Hawk and Bear on the Wall of Tongyang 
Inn, I Sing of It with the Rhyme of a Poem by Chen Jiaoyu.” According to Ch?ng, 
Chen Jiaoyu (Chen De ??, 1330–78) composed the poem at the order of Jiang Yin­
hou ??? (1324–81), who fought for the establishment of the Ming dynasty. Chen’s 
poem was a case in which writers from the late Yuan dynasty praised a general dur­
ing the early Ming by using the yingxiong fable. Chen’s poem, already written before 
Ch?ng’s visit, touched Ch?ng and prompted him to write a long poem:
The painting Ch?ng saw must have displayed excellent execution. Ch?ng 
compares its painter with Guo Xi ?? (1023–85) and Han Gan ?? (fl. eighth 
century), high praise for painters at the time. Guo Xi was regarded as the best 
painter in late Kory? and early Chos?n times, while Han Gan had a great reputa­
tion for his naturalistic animal paintings. Moved by the painting of the hawk and 
bear, Ch?ng described it in detail. The painting portrayed an impressive scene of 
confrontation between the two strongest animals, one of the skies and one of the 
forests, much like the painting Wang Li had seen. Ch?ng refers to Douxian ?? 
(d. 92), the renowned loyal general of the Han dynasty who defeated the Huns and 
set up a monument on the top of Mt. Yanran to boast of the nation’s glory.25 Like 
Wang Li’s comparison of the hawk and bear with Han dynasty generals, Ch?ng 
associates the two animals with Douxian, who made a signifi cant contribution to 
the peace and territorial expansion of the Han dynasty. Chen’s poem may have 
exhibited the emotional tone of loyalty and recalled the Chinese historical heroes 
in Ch?ng’s mind. It certainly led Ch?ng to consider his own loyalty, as he wrote: “I 
hope to bow to the emperor after I fulfill some meritorious deed.”
Although the Chinese emperor in 1386 was the first emperor of the Ming 
dynasty, the painting on the wall and the poems gracing it show the long usage of 
yingxiong painting since the Yuan. Ch?ng’s poem is valuable evidence that attests 
to the existence of a hawk­and­bear painting with the message of bravery and loy­
alty and also its dissemination, as it was displayed in a location where numerous 
people came and went during the late Yuan and early Ming periods. Although the 
painting at the Tongyang Inn with Chen’s poem inscribed on it is no longer extant, 
we can presume that such an impressive hawk­and­bear painting alluding to loy­
alty was not a one­off in China.
It is rather difficult to visualize the composition of the painting, considering 
that hawks and bears do not fight each other in nature and that bears were not a 
familiar sight in China at the time. Previous scholarship has suggested that the
so­called Yingxiongping, or Champion Vase, made of bronze or jade and dated 
to the Han and Song period, employed the theme of heroic Yingxiong during the 
Ming (Sung 2009: 34–38). In fact, this unnatural scene originated in early times; 
the image juxtaposing a hawk and a bear appeared on the flags of ancient Chinese 
ritual processions (Wang Anshi, Zhouguan xinyi ????, vol. 11).26 The flags 
painted with a hawk and a bear must have displayed robust and wonderful power. 
It can be surmised that the image of the two animals together came from such rit­
ual sights. Therefore, the vases of Yingxiong and the pre­Yuan and Yuan paintings 
of Yingxiong were an application of the traditional image of the strongest beings. 
Especially in Yuan paintings, Yingxiong came to express a tone of loyalty, compar­
ing the animals to historical heroes who possessed that virtue.
The Allegory Received and Transformed in Early Chos?n Korea
Ch?ng Mongju was the foremost influential figure in Korean scholars’ understand­
ing and appreciation of Yuan hawk painting. Several scholars from the late Kory? 
and early Chos?n periods praised his poem on the hawk­and­bear painting. Yi 
Saek ?? (1328–96) pointed out Ch?ng’s magnanimous spirit (Ch?ng Mongju 
1607, appendix 1b), and Ch?ng Toj?n ??? (1342–98), a key figure who argued 
for the legitimacy of founding the Chos?n dynasty, likewise complimented Ch?ng 
Mongju’s manly vigor (Ch?ng Toj?n 1791, 3:38a). Ch?ng Mongju’s willingness 
to die in opposition to the founding of a new government in the last moments of 
the Kory? dynasty moved early Chos?n kings and scholars to honor him and his 
loyalty. Ch?ng’s poem inscribed on the hawk­and­bear painting also became sym­
bolic of his allegiance to Kory?. However, Korean scholars who read Ch?ng’s poem 
were not able to see the painting mentioned in the poem and catch the homopho­
nous pun, so they were not particularly interested in the combination of the hawk 
and bear. Despite the interest Ch?ng’s poem generated among scholars, therefore, 
Yingxiong paintings did not catch on in Korea. This is a marked difference in the 
history of Korean hawk painting, with Yingxiong painting never developing as it 
did in China. Bear paintings, in general, were rarely executed in Kory? and Chos?n; 
only hawk paintings as representations of meritorious heroes flourished there.
Textual sources suggest that early Chos?n scholars appreciated elaborate 
and colorful Chinese hawk paintings from the Yuan. Prince Anp’y?ng ???
? (1418–53), the third son of King Sejong ?? (1397–1450; r. 1418–50), was an 
ambitious collector of Chinese painting and calligraphy and owned many hawk 
paintings. According to Sin Sukchu’s ??? (1417–75) Hwagi ?? (Record of Paint-
ings), the list of items in Prince Anp’y?ng’s collection included five hawk paintings 
with such titles as Hawk in Brown (Hwang?ng ??), Hawk in Indigo (Haech’?ng ?
?), and Crow-like Hawk (Agol ??) (Sin Sukchu 1645, 14:3b). Haech’?ng, the title 
of three scrolls in the prince’s collection, was a specific name for the best breed of 
hawks. Sin Sukchu explained that some hawk paintings depicted the animal with 
folded wings, while others showed it in hot pursuit of prey. He had a favorable com­
ment for all: “Either way, all of them draw the hawks naturalistically.”
All the hawk paintings and another twenty bird­and­flower paintings in the 
prince’s collection are listed under the name of a Yuan painter named Wang Gong­
yan ???, who does not appear in any Chinese records. Present­day Korean art 
historians have agreed on the possibility of miswriting, and that Wang Gongyan 
must be, in fact, Wang Yuan, a well­known professional painter of bird­and­flower 
paintings in the Yuan dynasty (O Tay?n 2011). Wang Yuan was a prolific painter 
with a meticulous and brilliant style, usually completing his works with great 
detail and attention. Sin Sukchu praises the painting titles attributed to the name of 
“Wang Gongyan” for their elaborate style, making the connec ion between Wang 
Gongyan and Wang Yuan all the more possible. Although all the paintings in the 
prince’s collection were scattered or burned shortly after his untimely death, Sin’s 
record confirms that hawk paintings were appreciated in the early Chos?n period.
Among early Chos?n scholars’ poems on hawk paintings, we find only one 
written about a Korean painter’s work. The painter was An Ky?n ?? (fl. fifteenth 
century), considered the most competent painter from the early Chos?n dynasty. 
The poem describes An’s painting as portraying a hawk on its perch. It praises the 
painting as a historical masterpiece, using the Korean idiom “a tiger skin left after 
the tiger’s death,” often used to indicate something excellent (? T?kkang 1617: 
32b). We can presume that An Ky?n’s hawk painting exhibited the Yuan style, 
because his major patron was Prince Anp’y?ng. Studying the prince’s excellent 
collection, including Wang Gongyan’s hawk paintings, must have motivated An 
to demonstrate in his works what he had learned from them. We can also infer 
An’s high­quality brushwork and naturalistic portrayal from how satisfied early 
Chos?n scholars were with his hawk painting.
Written documents also inform us that in the early Chos?n period scholars 
understood hawk paintings according to the hawk­hero allegory prevalent in Yuan 
China. A poem on An Ky?n’s hawk painting identified the bird as a hero with a 
chivalrous disposition. Another poem, “Hwa?ng” ?? (“On the Painting of a 
Hawk”) by the influential scholar­official S? K?j?ng ??? (1420–88),27 describes 
the hawk as a hero:
According to S?’s poem, a skillful painter has depicted a white hawk sitting 
motionless and with dignified features, such as white feathers, green talons, and 
yellow pupils. S? emphasizes the hawk’s excellent ability, aspirations, and high­
minded thought as implied through its ruffling of its gorgeous plumage. The
hawk is not currently hunting but remains faithful to its owner, who may need its 
hunting ability; it awaits the day when his service would be required. The hawk 
is like a perfectly prepared general, waiting to “render merit” for the sake of the 
country and, of course, for the king.28 This poem has a different nuance from 
the Yuan dynasty poems discussed above. It puts more emphasis on the hawk’s 
future achievements than on its past contributions. This particular emphasis by 
the Korean poet may reflect the influence of Ch?ng Mongju, who had pledged to 
become a hawk­like official and indeed fulfilled that mission when he later died 
for the Kory? dynasty.
In the following century, the renowned scholar Kim Inhu ??? (1510–60) 
used the same allegory in his poem on a hawk painting, which expresses his antic­
ipation of playing the role of a truly loyal subject with outstanding ability:
The painting Kim saw must have been a simple image of a hawk perched rather 
than in the act of hunting. Like all cultured viewers at the time, Kim immediately 
conjured up the allegory of rabbits and foxes and followed S? K?j?ng in expecting 
the hawk to display its ability in the future. Kim calls the turbulent time when the 
hawk can perform its ability “Ch’o­t’aek” ?? (C. Chuze; “marsh in the state of Chu 
of Southern China”), which refers to the unfortunate historical event of the loyalist 
Qu Yuan ?? (d. 278 BCE) being exiled and committing suicide. When King Injong 
?? (1515–45; r. 1544–45) died before completing even the first year of his reign, 
Kim left the royal court and held a memorial service for the king every year for the 
rest of his life. Kim, who was revered as a loyalist throughout the rest of the Chos?n 
period, fittingly speaks of his hope for the arrival of a hero who will overcome any 
difficult situation that might test his loyalty. The cases of S? and Kim demonstrate 
that during the early Chos?n period, the hawk­hero allegory conveyed hope for a 
faithful hero’s future achievements, which in turn implied the poet’s own commit­
ment. In their engagement with the Chinese hawk­hero allegory, Korean scholars 
further strengthened its aspect of loyalty and honored the faithful hero.
Another characteristic that distinguishes Chos?n hawk paintings from their 
Chinese counterparts is that those from the late fifteenth century depicted a hawk 
having already caught a rabbit while still incorporating the hawk­hero allegory. 
Painting the hawk’s success ul subjugation of the rabbit was a departure from the 
Yuan paintings, in which a hawk was beautifully painted without any trace of a rab­
bit or a fox. King S?ngjong ?? (1457–95; r. 1469–95) used such a hawk painting, 
titled A Hawk Seizes a Rabbit in Autumn (Ch’u?ngbakt’odo ?????), to demon­
strate his expec ations of his subjects. The recipient, S?ng Hy?n ?? (1439–1504), 
wrote a long poem in gratitude. The poem “A Hawk Seizes a Rabbit in Autumn, the
King’s New Year’s Painting for Me” (“Susa sehwa sohwa Ch’u?ngbakt’o” ?????
?????) reveals his thoughts on the meaning of the hawk in the painting:
The scene of the rabbit attacked by the hawk must have been surprisingly vivid, 
because the only comment S?ng Hy?n makes directly on the painting is the phrase 
“surprised by this painting of a rabbit struck.” What surprises him is the hawk’s 
power and swift, resolute behavior. After designating the hawk as a mighty hunter 
and the rabbit as its prey, S?ng discusses the lessons he has learned from the paint­
ing and ponders his obligation to live up to the king’s expec ations. At the time of 
composing this poem, S?ng had recently been appointed by the king as hy?ngjo 
ch’amp’an ????, a position akin to vice minister, in the Ministry of Justice.29 
When S?ng swears his allegiance to the king and the obligations of his high posi­
tion, he uses the allegory of the hawk fulfilling its role in the future. King S?ng­
jong’s gift of the fierce hawk image indicates that early Chos?n sovereigns and 
subjects understood and employed, in relevant circumstances, the hawk­rabbit 
allegory. King S?ngjong and S?ng Hy?n even appear to treat the allegory with a 
hint of humor, which relates to the political atmosphere of the time. They equated 
the impressive scene of a hawk catching a rabbit with S?ng’s job, which would be 
to judge and punish those who committed crimes. Although the hawk­and­rabbit 
painting followed the traditional allegory of pledging loyalty, the treatment by the 
king and S?ng with such a tone of amusement demonstrates a loosened connec­
tion between the allegory and the weighty concept of loyalism. In the past, King 
S?ngjong had given another painting titled A Beautiful Lady (Y?indo ???) to 
S?ng Hy?n as a New Year’s gift,30 and the subject of the painting elicited laughter 
from everyone present at the occasion. S?ng also immediately understood the 
message and wrote in an essay that the king had admonished him to watch out for
women (S?ng Hy?n 1842, 9:10a–b). The hawk­and­rabbit painting also surprised 
viewers like S?ng, who reacted with an element of pleasure rather than with grav­
ity. S?ngjong, the ninth Chos?n king, recorded a number of achievements, such as 
completing state legislation codes and ordering large­scale publications on Korean 
literature and music. During such a time of stability and flourishing culture, a 
painting need not embody notions as serious as loyalism.
One noteworthy painter who recognized the attitudes of these scholars and 
produced many hawk paintings was Yi Am ?? (b. 1499). A descendant of the royal 
family, he was one of the most renowned bird­and­flower painters of the early six­
teenth century. A number of Yi’s extant works show a high level of professional skill, 
with elaborate brushwork and exquisite pigments. Yi’s paintings were highly appre­
ciated in Chos?n Korea, where many scholars wrote poems on his works.31 Yi also 
gained a great reputation for his hawk paintings. Sin Kwanghan ??? (1484–1555), 
a scholar­official who composed many poems on Yi’s paintings, described a pair of 
scrolls titled White Hawk and Black Hawk ???? (Sin Kwanghan 1573, 3:11b–12a). 
According to Sin’s poem, Yi’s two hawks evinced a heroic spirit, gracefully and peace­
fully perched. At least three paintings with Yi’s seal that depict a perched hawk remain 
today, although whether these paintings inspired Sin’s poem remains unclear.32
Yi Am further developed the image of a hawk hunting a rabbit, which was 
rare in the history of Chinese hawk painting but became widespread in Chos?n 
Korea. “Inscribed on Tus?ng Kongja’s ???? [Yi Am] Painting of a Hawk” by a 
contemporaneous scholar named Na Sik ?? (d. 1546) described such an image. 
In the painting, one hawk is chasing a rabbit, and the other hawk has already 
caught one. Na Sik’s poem portrays the scene of the capture as follows:
The poem describes the scene of a rabbit under the sharp talons of a hawk. A rabbit 
in the cold is a rabbit that has gained weight from hibernation—a perfect target for 
hunting. The poet imagines the wild birds mourning. While still employing the 
allegory of a heroic hawk vanquishing a sneaky rabbit, he reinterprets the scene 
with the bustle and animation of wild birds.
Such a depic ion of a hawk gripping a rabbit in its talons is almost nonexistent 
in extant Chinese paintings and textual records but appears frequently in literary 
records and paintings from Chos?n Korea. The hawk painting that King S?ngjong 
gifted to S?ng Hy?n featured such an image as well. Because the paintings inscribed 
by S?ng Hy?n and Na Sik have not survived, we need to turn to a painting of the
same subject from a later period, such as A Brown Hawk Seizing a Rabbit (Hwang?ng-
bakt’odo ?????; fig. 5) by Sim Saj?ng (1707–69). It shows a fierce hawk clutch­
ing a rabbit and wild birds crying in the trees, echoing the scene described in Na Sik’s 
poem. The eighteenth­century painting further tells us that such portrayals of a rab­
bit caught in the talons of a hawk were enjoyed for a long time in the Chos?n period.
Korean hawk paintings maintained the same heroic hawk allegory as did 
Yuan Chinese hawk ones, but they also showed an interesting departure from their 
Chinese counterparts. Hawk paintings in Chos?n Korea developed into two types 
of images. The first was a hawk perched and looking afar, expecting to undertake 
the duty of hunting a rabbit out of solemn loyalty. The second was a hawk having 
already caught a rabbit, which served as a metaphor for the accomplishment of the 
heroic hawk. It is difficult to explain why Chos?n scholars enjoyed the latter image 
so much. They seem to have appreciated the scene of the hawk catching the rabbit 
before their very eyes—of the hero completing its mission. The scene may also have 
the mental composure that came with political stability, even leading people to enjoy 
with a sense of humor the image of a rabbit trembling beneath the robust hawk.
After the Allegory of Meritorious Hero
Hawk paintings during the Ming period carried over the previous Yuan imagery and 
meanings but, at the same time, began to show distinctive features related to worldly 
desires. The most impressive image produced by Ming painters was a pair of hawks 
with two or four magpies.3 Although a written record regarding the combination of 
hawks and magpies is yet to be found, it seems to impart a message of blessing. In 
China, magpies have traditionally signified good news,34 and a hawk was a forceful 
subject who punished the sly and wily in the Yuan. Thus, images that combined the 
two meant good things to come and that bad fortune would be defeated.
Another type of image created during the Ming was a hawk catching a 
beautiful pheasant in a tree, usually with a bear hiding nearby. The bear seems to 
have lost the pheasant to the hawk. The Ming scholar Cheng Minzheng’s ??? 
(1445–99) poem on the painting titled Heroes Fighting for a Pheasant (Yingxiong 
duojin ????) makes the meaning clear (Cheng 1773–85, 88:21b): to hold a 
pheasant is to win an honorable prize.35 Cheng’s poem conveys that the image of a 
hawk holding a pheasant is a figurative expression for a promising scholar who has 
passed the civil examination. Therefore, this painting may have been a congratula­
tory gift for a scholar who had surpassed others, succeeded in the difficult test, and 
was now on track to occupy high office. The main theme of hawk paintings came 
to be concerned with an individual’s success in life.
Besides a pheasant, a white­headed bird also began to appear in hawk­and­
bear paintings. According to a poem by He Jingming ??? (1483–1521), in one 
such painting by the well­known court painter Lin Liang ?? (1436–87), the 
white­headed bird signified a baidu bird, which in turn indicated human old age. 
The baidu of “baidu bird” is ??, or “white head”—a metaphor for longevity that 
appeared continuously throughout the history of Chinese painting.36 The poem 
by He Jingming (Dafuji ??? 13:25b) tells of the message of the painting: “Lin 
Liang’s drawing skill is truly outstanding. Both the blue hawk and the black bear 
look as if they are alive. A white­headed bird is also painted with them. Seen from a 
distance, its plumage seems poised for flight. . . . There’s nothing more precious to 
enjoy. Please appreciate this hero approaching the white­headed.”3 The last phrase 
has a double meaning: a hawk will go to the white­headed bird, or a hero will live a 
long life. Therefore, a painting of a hawk and a white­headed bird conveys the wish 
that someone hero­like will enjoy a long life.
A type of hawk painting with a more powerful and practical function for 
ordinary people in the late Ming period was those purported to be by Huizong ?
? (1082–1135; r. 1100–1126), the last emperor of the Northern Song (Kho 2013). 
Considered to have the apotropaic func ion of a talisman against evil, many hawk 
paintings with Huizong’s signature that bear his peculiar style were repeatedly 
copied and distributed across East Asia. It is thus not difficult to come across a 
hawk painting attributed to him today, although they are unlikely to be authentic. 
These hawk paintings believed to have been authored by Huizong were especially 
prevalent during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. According to Wang 
Shizhen’s ??? (1634–1711) collection of stories that circulated widely at the 
time, late Ming and early Qing people believed that owning a hawk painting by
Huizong killed evil foxes (Wang Shizhen, Chibeioutan, 29:2b–3a).38 In this case, 
the painted hawk functioned to solve personal problems.39
Such hawk paintings “by Huizong” came to be appreciated and popular in 
late Chos?n as well, for Korean people also believed in the mysterious power of 
the image. Because Chos?n scholars had criticized Huizong’s preoccupation with 
paintings and music, which they believed had ultimately led him to lose his throne, 
it is somewhat ironic that Koreans came to believe that such paintings prevented 
mis ortune. Paintings or prints of a hawk as talismans against evil continued to be 
extremely popular in Korea until the early twentieth century (Kho 2013).40
In the late Chos?n dynasty, the hawk­hero allegory in paintings all but disap­
peared. Instead, hawk paintings of strong power to avert evil, as explained above, 
or those characterized by witty humor came to be favored. An example of the latter 
is a work by the aforementioned painter Sim Saj?ng, who added another interest­
ing motif to his paintings of a hawk catching a rabbit (fig. 6). This additional motif 
was a pair of pheasants hiding under a cliff, where a hawk has caught a rabbit and 
pinned it down. Because the rabbit has been caught, the pheasants are safe. Still, the 
male pheasant thrusts its head under the rocks in panic. The humor lies in the male 
pheasant’s gorgeous tail, a symbol of pride, that sticks out shamefully against the 
cliff. The painter tried to delineate the tail in incredible detail to make the pheasant 
cock look ridiculous enough to elicit laughter. The Chos?n scholar Yi Kiji ??? 
(1690–1722) mentions the painting in a poem: “People laugh too hard at the pheas­
ant under the rock. It can’t hide properly with its head stuck in the bushes” (Yi Kiji 
1768, 1:2b).41 This image fundamentally transformed the theme of hawk painting 
from that of dignified subject of heroic achievements into something more comical. 
Thus, viewers of this painting could simply enjoy the various features of the animals.
Conclusion
The hawk, a bird of prey in nature and a stalwart assistant to humans in hunting, 
has always been an attractive subject for painting because it represents strength. 
Hawk paintings in East Asia have a long history, but their inclusion of the hawk­
as­hero allegory to praise a meritorious subject appeared most prominently from 
the Yuan to the early Chos?n period. The image of a hawk silent in the forest sym­
bolized a heroic military general or a faithful subject under a well­governed reign. 
Yingxiong, or a hawk and a bear, signified heroes and recalled famous military 
generals in history. As Korea appropriated the Chinese hawk paintings and their 
hawk­as­hero allegory in the late Kory? and early Chos?n periods, more empha­
sis was placed on loyal deeds. In the process, remarkable differences emerged 
between the hawk paintings of China and Korea. In Chos?n Korea, the Chinese 
pun of Yingxiong did not transmit well, and the image of a rabbit caught in the 
hawk’s talons developed as a conspicuous message of heroic achievements. In both 
cases, the allegory of sly rabbits and foxes was always included.
Both China and Korea witnessed a shift in the meaning of hawk paintings 
from meritorious hero to more mundane and even humorous messages. This 
shift reflected the changing political climate. The allegory of a hero fulfilling his 
mission of bringing peace to the realm emerged and became established in the
complicated political circumstances of the Yuan, early Ming, and early Chos?n: 
the consolidation of multiple ethnic groups under the Mongol Khan and the 
unstable society under newly established regimes. Those who worked under the 
rule of the Yuan, early Ming, or early Chos?n wanted to demonstrate their fidelity 
to their sovereigns. Hawk paintings with the allegory of praising a heroic con­
tribution were an effective medium for displaying their political standing. The 
symbolic meaning of the hawk as a loyal hero was precisely the reason that the 
popularity of hawk paintings gradually waned. The rise of the image of a hawk 
catching a plump rabbit indicated the changing mood following the stabilization 
of the Chos?n dynasty. What used to be achievements owing to loyalty now took 
on some humorous nuances. In late Chos?n, the motif of a silly pheasant in the 
hawk­rabbit painting completely changed the tone of the painting into a whimsi­
cal one that made viewers laugh. Ming hawk paintings also came to be associated 
with various worldly pursuits or puns. Once the complicated politics dissipated 
with the collapse of the Mongols and the more stable societies of the Ming and the 
Chos?n, the need for expressing political affiliation diminished.
