Title:
A narrative inquiry approach to understanding senior intensive 
care nurses’ experiences of working with new graduate nurses

Abstract:
Aims and objectives: To report a qualitative inquiry exploring senior registered nurses’ 
stories of experience working with new graduate nurses in the intensive care unit.
Background: While new graduate nurses’ perceptions of transitioning into profes-
sional practice in the intensive care unit have been examined, few studies have ex-
plored the experiences of the senior registered nurses working alongside them.
Design: A  narrative inquiry  methodology  informed  by Dewey's (1938) theory of 
experience.
Methods: Individual in-depth, unstructured, interactive interviews were conducted 
with five senior registered nurses. The inquirer co-composed individual narrative ac-
counts with each participant. Narrative inquiry's three commonplaces of temporality, 
sociality and place formed the lens of analysis.
Thematic analysis identified two overarching threads that resonated across the narra-
tive accounts. This inquiry adheres to COREQ checklist reporting.
Results: The overarching threads ‘Reverberations’ and ‘Caring’ depict the experiences 
of senior registered nurses.  ‘It's Dangerous’, ‘Patrolling Like Surf Lifesavers’, ‘We 
Carry Them’, ‘Survival Mode’ and ‘Enjoyable Moments’ are minor threads describing 
the challenges, while ‘I’ve Been There’, ‘They Must Ask Questions’ and ‘Not In My 
Backyard’ reveal their insights.
Conclusions: Working with new graduate nurses increased senior registered nurses’ 
patient surveillance and workload, contributing to stress, pressure and feeling over-
whelmed. However, senior registered nurses felt an obligation to care for new gradu-
ate nurses, who they perceived as still acquiring the skills to autonomously care for 
critically ill patients. Therefore, senior registered nurses require support themselves.
Relevance to clinical practice: Senior registered nurses perceive workplace con-
straints as impeding their capacity to provide sufficient support and surveillance to 
new graduate nurses. The gap between new graduate nurses’ clinical capacity and 
patients’ needs underpins senior registered nurses’ recommendation that new gradu-
ate nurses should not be placed in intensive care units unless additional workforce 
support is provided, safeguarding their development as well as patient safety.

----------------------


Text:
----------------------
DOI: 10.1111/jocn.15844 
Senior registered nurses (SRNs) working in the intensive care unit (ICU) 
have acquired the skills and knowledge to care for the most critically ill 
patients. Historically, registered nurses (RNs) did not commence their 
career in critical care areas of a hospital. Rather, they had one year 
of clinical experience in acute hospital wards which was thought to 
provide a better foundation to enter the challenging ICU environment. 
However, in 2009, a selection of new graduate nurses (NGNs) em-
ployed by the inquiry site began their career in the ICU (Saghafi et al., 
2012). The SRNs bear most of the responsibility for guiding NGNs’ 
development, often in addition to their own clinical responsibilities. 
As ICUs continue to experience staffing pressure from international 
nursing shortages (Sawatzky et al., 2015), an inquiry into the working 
relationship of SRNs towards NGNs was needed.
The global nursing shortage can be explained as a supply and 
demand problem. Demand for RNs continues to grow amid increas-
ing patient numbers needing hospital-level health care. Contributing 
factors include an increasing reliance on technologically advanced 
health care plus the increased age and growth of the population 
(Mar? et al., 2019). Concurrently, a worldwide under-supply and 
predicated shortage of RNs can be explained by an ageing RN work-
force (Mar? et al., 2018), a reduction in nursing graduates, NGN at-
trition from hospital workforces (Hussein et al., 2019) and unhealthy 
work environments (Ulrich et al., 2014).
Areas such as ICUs may experience greater nursing shortages 
(Sawatzky et al., 2015) due to onerous workloads, an ageing work-
force, attrition from the nursing workforce and high patient acuity 
(Duffield et al., 2014). Caring for critically ill patients is demanding, 
both physically and emotionally, evoking a greater propensity to 
burnout than other clinical areas (American Association of Critical 
Care Nurses [AACN], 2016).
Nursing workforce attrition negatively affects healthcare effi-
ciency and cost, ultimately reducing the quality of patient health care 
(Duffield et al., 2014). Nurses’ ability to deliver high-quality patient 
care is affected by hours of practice, nursing skill mix and practice en-
vironment. These factors are associated with rates of adverse patient 
events (Twigg et al., 2013). Those NGNs who are not supported on 
an evidenced-based Transition to Professional Practice programme, 
self-report more negative safety practices, errors, decreased overall 
competence and increased stress (Spector et al., 2015). SRNs are a 
vital NGN resource, providing clinical improvement opportunities, 
advice, support and education (Bortolotto, 2015).
Some SRNs may become discouraged and frustrated when 
faced with the increased workload of repetitive NGN recruitment, 
orientation and preceptorship cycles (Ballem & MacIntosh, 2014). 
When SRNs are in short supply or are stressed or over-worked, 
• SRNs describe negative emotions such as frustration, 
stress and guilt when balancing ICU clinical responsibili-
ties while supporting NGNs. These negative emotions 
result from the perceived risk to the provision of safe 
and quality ICU patient care when increased SRN work-
loads impede their capacity to provide sufficient NGN 
supervision.
• Conversely, SRNs describe positive feelings such as 
satisfaction and pride when NGNs flourish. Committed 
to supporting NGNs’ clinical and professional develop-
ment, SRNs recommend additional resources, time and 
supernumerary staff to provide adequate patient sur-
veillance, NGN guidance and continuing in situ clinical 
education.
dissatisfaction, burnout and high turnover can result (AACN, 2016). 
Baumberger-Henry (2012) reports that some SRNs interact nega-
tively with NGNs. Consequently, NGNs may become disheartened, 
contributing to higher attrition rates. Reducing both SRN and NGN 
turnover rates is an important goal to reduce the associated human 
and financial costs that affect healthcare budgets as well as patient 
and staff outcomes (Duffield et al., 2014).
A systematised review process guided a literature search from 
January 2000–November 2018, with inclusion criteria of original 
research studies reporting SRNs’ experiences or views of NGNs 
working in ICU. Research not situated in ICU or specifically related 
to NGNs’ or nursing students’ ICU experience was excluded. The 
literature search process is provided in Box 1.
Although the literature explores NGNs’ experiences transition-
ing to the workplace, including ICU, the search identified no research 
studies that solely explored SRNs’ experiences working in ICU with 
NGNs. Three studies (Ballem & MacIntosh, 2014; Baumberger- 
Henry, 2012; O'Kane, 2012) partly addressed inclusion criteria.
Advanced communication, critical thinking and clinical knowl-
edge, together with the capacity to apply these skills in clinical 
practice, are crucial to nursing (Saghafi et al., 2012). Despite this, 
NGNs begin their careers without the expertise, experience or con-
fidence to work independently in settings impacted by escalating 
patient acuity and workload intensity. Studies exploring NGNs’ ex-
periences transitioning into professional practice describe theory– 
practice gap (Gohery & Meaney, 2013), transition shock (Duchscher, 
2009), a lack of confidence (Ortiz, 2016), unsupportive work envi-
ronments (Parker et al., 2014) and horizontal violence (Parker et al., 
2014). When they transition directly into ICUs, NGNs experience a 
spectrum of emotions (Elias & Day, 2020), are challenged when rec-
ognising the necessity to possess highly developed communication 
skills (Saghafi et al., 2012), are scared of making mistakes (St Clair, 
2013), are unsure of socialisation processes (Innes & Calleja, 2018) 
and have a desire to learn (St Clair, 2013).
Descriptions of programmes designed to orientate NGNs to ICU 
(Bortolotto, 2015; Friedman et al., 2011; Welding, 2011) revealed a 
focus on NGNs’ distinct learning needs, using various educational 
methods to support them while addressing patient safety, nursing 
attrition, safeguarding of RN staffing numbers and delivery of high- 
quality nursing care. However, the programmes did not investigate 
the SRNs’ experience of working with the NGNs.
The studies that partly addressed inclusion criteria described the 
SRNs’ perceptions of NGNs’ ICU experiences as the second phase 
of a study (O'Kane, 2012) or included SRNs from an ICU alongside 
other hospital wards (Ballem & MacIntosh, 2014; Baumberger-Henry, 
2012). Although O’Kane’s (2012) study sought to explore the NGNs’ 
ICU working experience, the parallels and disparities between SRNs’ 
and NGNs’ perspectives of the phenomena were examined. Despite 
the SRNs’ perception that NGNs managed the demanding aspects 
of the ICU well, the ICU and SRNs were placed under considerable 
pressure when supporting NGNs, raising concerns regarding the 
NGNs’ lack of hospital knowledge. The rate of preceptor burnout 
increased with the number of NGNs employed. The authors deter-
mined that NGNs require 8 weeks of supernumerary time and be 
supported by two nursing preceptors. Additionally, a focus on com-
pleting competency-based training was thought to contribute to cre-
ating a generation of task-oriented RNs (O’Kane, 2012).
Ballem and MacIntosh’s (2014) study sought to understand 
SRNs’ perspectives of working with NGNs in various hospital clinical 
settings, including critical care [ICU]. Analysis identified three themes: 
‘‘New Graduates Are Coming’, ‘Keeping Us on Our Toes’ and ‘Carrying 
the Load’’ (p. 379). Despite a considerable workload increase when 
working with NGNs, SRNs were motivated to refresh and update 
their skills and knowledge; anticipating NGNs’ questions and need for 
procedural support. Although SRNs voiced verbal support for NGNs, 
they also expressed annoyance when NGNs did not follow advice.
Baumberger-Henry’s (2012) study examined SRNs’ perspectives 
on work relationships with NGNs in emergency and critical care 
[ICU] units. The study determined the following themes: ‘‘Lacking 
Confidence’ and ‘Gaining Acceptance in the Unit Culture’’ (p. 301). 
The SRNs expressed frustration with NGNs’ fear, lack of confidence, 
deficiencies in basic skills, critical thinking and time management. 
The second theme described SRNs’ uncivil behaviour towards NGNs, 
such as belittling or ignoring NGNs’ questions and using patronising 
language. The SRNs recognised their collective silence legitimised 
the unsupportive behaviour. Baumberger-Henry (2012) emphasised 
that NGNs should be encouraged and nurtured to ask question with-
out fear of being perceived as burdensome.
Finding scant literature, the necessity to examine the SRNs’ ex-
periences when working with NGNs in the ICU was evident. Analysis 
of SRNs’ experiences may reveal interpersonal, cultural and work-
place factors influencing workplace relationships, staff well-being, 
retention and ultimately patient safety.
The aim of this article was to report a narrative inquiry that explored 
SRNs’ stories of experiences working with NGNs in the ICU.
Narrative inquiry methodology recognises stories of experience 
as a source of valuable understanding and knowledge (Clandinin & 
Connelly, 2000). The term ‘narrative’ refers to the phenomenon of 
the experience being studied and the method of inquiry for its study 
(Clandinin & Connelly, 2000). The three-dimensional space of narra-
tive inquiry is informed by Dewey’s (1938) criteria of ‘experience— 
interaction and continuity enacted in situations’ (Clandinin, 2013, 
p. 12). The three commonplaces of narrative inquiry that delineate 
the inquiry space dimensions are ‘temporality, sociality and place’ 
(Clandinin, 2013, p. 39). These are defined in Table 1 and were used 
to guide the exploration of SRNs’ stories of experience. The con-
solidated criteria for reporting qualitative studies (COREQ) 32-item 
checklist was used to report this inquiry (File S1).
An idiographic approach was used to purposively enrol five self- 
selecting participants who were willing to tell their stories of 
experience working with NGNs in the ICU. This enabled location 
of individual participant voices and stories of experience within the 
three-dimensional inquiry space, while facilitating rigorous analy-
sis of each participant's narrative account. The literature presents 
minimal research determining qualitative sample sizes, although 
recommendations exist. For example, when referring to narrative 
research, Creswell and Poth (2016) recommend selecting and ob-
serving one or more individuals who have stories and experiences 
to share. It has been argued that a sample size of ‘one single case 
can be highly informative and meaningful as demonstrated from 
management and medical research’ (Boddy, 2016, p.426). Focussing 
on narrative inquiry, Clandinin and Connelly (2000) provide exem-
plars of inquires involving one, three and five participants.
The inquiry was conducted at a single site, public quaternary 
referral hospital in an Australian metropolitan city. Recruitment fly-
ers were placed on ICU notice boards. Criteria for inquiry inclusion 
included: SRNs employed permanently in the ICU, having worked 
with a NGN in the immediate three months prior to the inquiry start 
date and were prepared to provide written, informed consent while 
observing the inquiry protocol. All participants had a pre-existing 
professional relationship with the first author (SW), a female clini-
cal nurse educator employed at the inquiry site; participants were 
aware the inquirer had an interest in the topic with the inquiry being 
undertaken as part of a higher research degree (SW). All recruited 
participants predominantly worked in the cardiothoracic ICU pod of 
a larger ICU service.
An ICU context description and definitions of specific vocabulary 
used in the inquiry are provided in Table 2. Potential participants inter-
ested in the inquiry meeting inclusion criteria were enrolled. No par-
ticipant was excluded or withdrew from the inquiry. The participants 
presented demographic homogeneity; being, anglophone, Caucasian 
and female. The nursing participants had accrued an average 13 years 
of experience in the inquiry site ICU. Two participants rotated through 
ICU pre-2009, on a Transition to Professional Practice programme final 
4-month placement. One participant commenced their career in ICU 
post-obtainment of their initial nursing qualification. However, this 
participant's country of origin nursing higher education programme 
TABLE 1?Narrative inquiry three- 
dimensional space.
and clinical exposure differed considerably from the Australian expe-
rience. Two participants gained initial nursing experience in acute care 
wards before being employed in the ICU.
The first author (SW) undertook unstructured interactive interviews 
between October 2016–January 2017, negotiating time and space 
for both inquirer and participant to tell and hear each other's stories 
of experience (Clandinin, 2013). Playing an active role, the inquirer 
commenced with a ‘grand tour question’ (Spradley, 2016). Focused 
listening, probes and responding to participant questions were used 
to gain rich details regarding the phenomenon under inquiry. The 
interview guide is provided in Table 3.
Interview location, date and time were decided by partici-
pants; all chose a private location proximal to the ICU. The inter-
views (average 41.4 minutes) and inquirer's post-interview verbal 
reflections to support reflexivity were digitally audio-recorded 
and independently transcribed. Field Text [data] collection to sat-
uration was not pursued; being incongruent with narrative inquiry 
methodology and the temporal dimension of the underlying philos-
ophy of experience.
The inquiry was approved by the hospital human research ethics 
committee and received ‘cross-institutional recognition of this ap-
proval from the [supervising] university’ (Whittam, 2018, p. 48). 
Confidentiality was protected by de- dentification and secure stor-
age of participant records and inquirer's field notes. Pseudonyms 
were used for participants and persons mentioned in the narrative 
accounts and when referencing participant quotes.
Participant information was provided, and consent was gained 
prior to interview. Iterative consent was sought throughout the in-
quiry. Attentive to the relational stance and the commonplace of 
TABLE 2?Inquiry term definitions/description.
New graduate 
nurse (NGN)
Resource nurse
sociality in narrative inquiry methodology, a reflexive approach per-
meated the inquiry.
Transcript accuracy was checked by reading the transcript while 
concurrently listening to the digital recording; this process fa-
cilitated inquirer (SW) immersion in the text. Attentive to the 
three-dimensional space, transcripts were arranged manually into 
chronologically and/or thematically coherent stories (Mishler, 1995) 
with minimal smoothing of participants’ quotes. The subsequent 
reconstructed stories were termed tentative narrative accounts 
(Clandinin, 2013).
Individual participants received a hard copy of their tentative 
narrative account, and all participants reflected, commented and ne-
gotiated elements of their story with the inquirer (SW). Credibility 
was established when participants confirmed that their final nar-
rative account accurately represented their story. Each narrative 
account was left ‘whole’, respecting and honouring the individual 
voice and story of experience (Appendix S2). An audit trail was main-
tained, with field notes, transcripts, research reflections and record-
ings retained.
The final narrative accounts underwent further analysis. A six- 
phase thematic analysis method (Braun & Clarke, 2006) guided the in-
quirer's (SW) active identification, analysis and reporting of ‘threads’ 
[themes] that resonated across the narrative accounts (Clandinin, 
2013). A semantic and inductive approach to thread identification 
was adopted (Braun & Clarke, 2006) with all authors (SW, NT, JP) 
contributing to thread refinement via Socratic questioning.
Two overarching threads, ‘Reverberations’ and ‘Caring’ resonated 
throughout the narrative accounts. The threads exemplify SRNs’ 
experiences working with NGNs in the ICU. Each main thread con-
tained minor threads adding additional levels of understanding; 
these are depicted in a network diagram format (Figure 1).
‘Reverberations’ have a continuing or prolonged effect. The over-
arching thread Reverberations represents the ongoing effect on 
SRNs as they support NGNs’ entry to ICU nursing practice. The 
These reverberations had particular repercussions post the NGNs’ 
supernumerary time, when NGNs transitioned from being additional, 
to being accounted for in the ICU nursing workforce numbers:
The SRNs detailed NGNs’ narrow experiences as independent 
nurses, describing their need for SRN support when delivering basic 
ICU nursing care and considerable assistance when providing ad-
vanced nursing interventions. Therefore, NGNs were perceived to be 
under-prepared for high-acuity patient care and the unrelenting pace 
inherent to the ICU:
all the machines and you go like, ‘Oh. My. God. What 
am I supposed to do? Where do I start? I don’t know 
what that machine does. I don’t know anything about 
this?’ 
[Camilla, Line. 219–223] (Whittam, 2018, p. 72).
The ramifications were further clarified using metaphors of surveil-
lance and juggling.
The SRNs were cognisant of the mismatch between skills and theory 
acquired at university and the actuality of ICU patient care demands. 
They perceived it to be dangerous for NGNs to autonomously care 
for patients in a high-acuity clinical environment while developing 
the required level of proficiency.
When emergencies occurred, SRNs observed NGNs were 
limited in their capacity to rapidly provide crucial nursing care. 
Therefore, SRNs immediately intervened to avoid patients 
being subjected to life-threatening and potentially dangerous 
complications:
Oversight by SRNs of the nursing care provided by NGNs was 
deemed critical to safeguard patient safety and avert potential 
hospital-acquired complications and associated sequelae:
Well, one new grad on a couple of occasions let the 
CVC [central venous catheter] disconnect from— 
without clamping it, so obviously risk of air embolism 
… Because, the first time it happened I thought okay, 
good, she would’ve learned her lesson now and that’s 
not going to happen again, but then it happened again 
and then it’s just like, oh my god, how—you know? 
That’s so scary to me … when you’re new, I think it’s 
just so easy to make mistakes 
[Sarah, Line. 38–61] (Whittam, 2018, pp. 74-75).
Acute awareness of the negative outcomes that could result from 
the mix of minimal nursing experience and critical illness led SRNs to 
feel responsible for safe patient care.
Attentive to the danger of NGNs working in nursing positions 
for which they lacked requisite experience and education, SRNs 
used surveillance processes to protect NGNs’ practice and pa-
tient safety. However, SRNs considered their surveillance to be 
insufficient due to workload demands in the high-acuity ICU 
environment:
In addition to observational vigilance, SRNs assisted the NGNs 
with their workload.
The SRNs perceived their concurrent roles in a lean nurse-staffing 
model with inadequate skill mix as contributors to excessive work-
loads. Common additional roles performed by SRNs comprise being 
a resource nurse and/or a code blue team member, educating less- 
experienced clinicians and preceptoring NGNs:
The SRNs actively advocated for reduced patient risk, requesting 
managers increase RN numbers so that NGNs were assigned patients 
within their current level of competence:
We don’t have any resource nurses, yeah. And, you 
really have to fight sometimes to have two nurses on 
fresh ECMO, and if you have those two nurses then 
things are unbelievably better, but if you don’t have 
them, you know, the new grads a lot of the time they 
can just sing [manage on their own] … You do really 
Although SRNs acknowledged that the preceptor position was fun-
damental to NGNs’ development and support, feelings of pressure and 
responsibility accompanied the role. These feelings were heightened 
when SRNs were assigned a critically ill patient alongside preceptoring 
responsibilities:
The SRNs reported self-denial, placing the needs of team members 
before their own. This facilitated NGNs to take assigned breaks, while 
preserving acceptable skill mix to safeguard patient safety:
You don’t get breaks because you’re too worried 
about the patient’s safety. So, you might just …sit 
down at the desk and eat your food there, hopefully, 
or have two minutes—go and heat up for food in the 
microwave and run back. It’s crazy sometimes 
[Camilla, Line. 128–131] (Whittam, 2018, p. 78).
Notwithstanding the additional workload related to supporting 
and supervising NGNs, SRNs urged NGNs to communicate concerns 
and request guidance; they provided learning opportunities and ame-
liorated NGNs’ workloads:
If they have to take a central line out, they’ve never 
taken a central line out. To have that time to show 
them where they find the … policy from, do the proce-
dure, like explain the whole thing. It’s a lengthy thing 
to do if you … look at the policy, explain the proce-
dure, do the procedure together and then have some 
sort of … feedback at the end of it … ‘you did great, 
next time you have to remember to do that, well done 
[Camilla, Line. 167–171] (Whittam, 2018, p. 78).
To ensure NGNs were nursing within their scope of practice, SRNs 
acted as advocates by sourcing suitably skilled RNs to care for high- 
acuity patients. The extra work involved in negotiating patient alloca-
tion changes was construed by SRNs as ‘carrying’ the NGNs:
Reallocating an NGN to a patient whose care requirements corre-
sponded with the NGN’s current skill set was an approach perceived to 
increase ICU patient safety:
The SRNs’ workload increased when they provided support to the 
NGNs.
Survival is continuing to live or exist despite difficult circumstances 
and represents SRNs’ ability to work in the particularly stressful ICU 
setting. When SRNs felt unable to meet the increased workload as-
sociated with delivering safe patient care while supporting NGNs, 
adverse psychological and emotional indicators, such as stress, pres-
sure, frustration and guilt, resulted:
The SRNs’ feelings of accountability to ensure NGNs’ potential 
errors were recognised and remedied before patient injury occurred 
generated considerable SRN stress. The potential for errors to cause 
an adverse patient event, or the death of a patient was omnipresent 
for SRNs:
The SRNs used a juggler metaphor to represent how they managed 
workload and stress when balancing support of NGNs with care for 
ICU patients:
During periods of increased patient acuity, when SRNs were bal-
ancing concurrent duties or when multiple NGNs were rostered simul-
taneously on a shift, SRNs were concerned and felt guilty that they 
were unable to complete tasks to a desired standard while maintaining 
a high level of NGN supervision. A sense of personal responsibility was 
assumed by SRNs when colleagues discussed concerns about NGNs’ 
nursing practice:
The SRNs experienced additional pressure throughout the ‘buddy’ 
period when guiding NGNs towards autonomous ICU practice:
Although some SRNs had established methods to create work/
life balance, others dreamt or thought about work when at home. The 
SRNs ‘coped’ with the demands of ICU work in various ways such as 
drinking alcohol at home to unwind after a work shift, talking with fam-
ily members or colleagues and attending counselling to deal with the 
emotional impact of complex patients:
Although SRNs felt pressure and stress, they also experienced pos-
itive rewards from NGNs working in ICU.
Educating NGNs stimulated SRNs to update their nursing knowledge 
and refresh their hands-on skills. Described by SRNs as beneficial for 
lifelong learning, teaching NGNs resulted in feelings of satisfaction 
and enjoyment. Questions from NGNs were received positively as 
they challenged SRNs’ practices and thought processes:
Sometimes it keeps your brain going with the ques-
tions they ask you. Makes you think about why you’re 
doing things or that you don’t. And then sometimes 
they might ask me something I don’t actually know, 
so then I have to go look it up. So, in that way it’s 
Contrastingly, the SRNs also recognised and appreciated when 
they learnt from NGNs:
Feelings of pride, accomplishment and reward were experienced 
by SRNs when NGNs progressed in their nursing practice.
Sometimes, NGNs exceeded expectations by demonstrating clini-
cal insight and critical thought beyond normal expectations:
The reverberations of increased workload in a high-risk environ-
ment experienced by the SRNs were counterbalanced by the satisfac-
tion of being able to safely guide the NGNs and share in their journey 
of skill development.
The concept of caring denotes the SRNs’ culture of nurturing NGNs, 
echoing the sociality commonplace. While SRNs had ambiguous 
opinions about the decision to allocate NGNs to ICU as a component 
of Transition to Professional Practice programme, they felt obligated 
to provide clinical, professional and psychological support, and par-
ticipated in NGNs’ clinical development. This obligation rested on a 
recognition of inherent danger in the ICU place, NGNs’ steep learn-
ing curve throughout the six-month ICU placement (temporality) and 
the consequences of potential mistakes as contributing towards 
NGNs’ feelings of stress and feeling overwhelmed.
A commitment to the NGNs’ integrating ICU specific skills and 
knowledge was understood by the SRNs as being essential to safe-
guard the delivery of patient care. The SRNs created educational 
opportunities for NGNs:
However, SRNs’ demonstration of caring extended beyond edu-
cation and clinical support to genuine attentiveness to the NGNs as 
individuals. Generating camaraderie with NGNs, SRNs created rela-
tionships that supported NGNs to be transparent about their experi-
ences and emotions:
The support offered by the whole ICU team was considered by 
SRNs as an essential component of caring for NGNs:
The caring demonstrated by SRNs was echoed in their appreciation 
of the significance of initial professional experiences. They sought to 
create worthwhile and positive experiences for NGNs’ placed in ICU:
Nurturing of NGNs originated from a blend of SRNs’ empathy and 
obligation to develop nurses new to the profession.
Thinking temporally and reflecting through the lens of their own expe-
riences when inexperienced in ICU gave SRNs insight into NGNs’ expe-
riences, motivating SRNs’ to be empathetic and caring towards NGNs:
I feel sorry for them because I was there and I know 
what it’s like 
As SRNs were acutely cognisant of the overwhelming and pres-
sured ICU work environment and how individuals coped, they actively 
sought to minimise unproductive communication styles and negative 
interactions:
The SRNs used their past experiences to motivate and guide their 
interactions with NGNs in the present, developing them for the future.
Linking NGNs’ ability, willingness and comfort in asking questions 
to their capability to deliver timely and safe care to ICU patients, 
SRNs were unable to sufficiently support NGNs’ workload, prevent 
potential patient error or provide timely education if they were not 
aware of NGNs’ concerns. The NGNs’ questions warned SRNs of la-
tent patient safety concerns.
During their daily clinical practice, SRNs reinforced the need for 
NGNs to ask questions:
An increased demand for NGNs to ask questions during hectic 
shifts was emphasised by SRNs, as their ability to provide surveillance 
was reduced. Explanations were provided to NGNs regarding the pos-
sible consequences of not seeking clarification or asking questions 
when unsure:
The substance of NGNs’ questions presented SRNs a window 
into how NGNs were advancing clinically, in addition to their com-
prehension of the justification underlying clinical decisions and 
interventions:
The SRNs postulated that NGNs’ reluctance at times to ask ques-
tions potentially may have been to obscure knowledge deficits, a sign 
of apprehension of the response, or hesitancy in the presence of pa-
tient visitors:
Well, the reality is that…they don’t always ask, you 
know. They’re too embarrassed to own up… not 
knowing something that they think they should know. 
Um, and you discover later on, when things go wrong, 
that they had no idea really and they didn’t come and 
ask you [Camilla, Line. 61–64] (Whittam, 2018, p.89).
The SRNs actively sought professional relationships with NGNs 
which were caring, empathetic and supportive, while encouraging 
them to ask questions when they felt uncertain:
A tension existed for SRNs in balancing parallel patient care de-
mands while offering NGNs guidance, answers and rationales. Feeling 
obligated to ensure NGNs provided excellent patient care, SRNs urged 
NGNs to raise concerns and ask questions. However, answering ques-
tions increased SRNs’ workload, resulting in increased stress; this was 
particularly noticeable when multiple NGNs worked on a shift. The 
SRNs felt frustrated when NGNs did not ask questions nor incorporate 
recommendations into their daily practice. Despite question fatigue or 
frustration, SRNs modified their behaviour by communicating openly 
and respectfully with NGNs:
Caring for NGNs’ development and the safety of ICU patients re-
quired SRNs to balance approachable availability for NGN questions 
while managing their own increased workload. Hence, SRNs required 
NGNs to be proactive, asking questions when they self- ecognised 
knowledge or skill gaps.
The phrase ‘not in my backyard’ is often a response to inappropriate 
property development in a local neighbourhood that is considered a 
good idea if it occurred elsewhere. Due to the gap between under-
graduate curriculum and the reality of ICU patient care, SRNs be-
lieved it would be better for NGN Transition to Professional Practice 
programme placement to be in a less critical clinical area:
Because they’re fresh from the uni. They haven’t got 
the skills. (Camilla, Line. 73–74, p.91)
The SRNs perceived that gaining RN experience before entering 
ICU would embed basic nursing skills and provide a broader knowledge 
of the patient's entire admission journey, including the integration of 
ICU within the wider hospital.
As SRNs deemed the ICU to be a stressful and overwhelming 
location, it was thought to be a sub-optimal clinical area for NGNs to 
acquire confidence in their newly obtained ICU skills and knowledge 
and clinical decision-making. The SRNs stated NGNs were learning 
to set priorities, manage their time, still developing aspects of basic 
care and task focused:
The SRNs argued that first rotation NGNs should not be allocated 
to ICU due to the gulf between the NGNs’ basic skill set and the inter-
ventions required by critically ill patients.
It was perceived by SRNs that there were insufficient resources, 
time and supernumerary staff to maintain sufficient first rotation NGN 
supervision and provide continuing, in situ clinical education, to de-
crease the possibility of errors in patient care:
It’s—it’s overwhelming. I think some of them are just 
paralysed with fear and take forever to learn things 
[Camilla, Line. 223–224] (Whittam, 2018, p. 92).
Demonstrating their commitment to NGNs’ clinical/professional 
development, SRNs highlighted the importance of NGNs obtaining 
clinical experience in acute hospital wards. The SRNs considered es-
sential nursing skills, such as patient assessment, patient hygiene, abil-
ity to prioritise and time management, would enhance NGNs’ nursing 
practice in ICU:
Participants recommended that gaining experience in acute hospi-
tal wards facilitated NGNs to embed patient assessment and surveil-
lance skills without over-reliance on invasive technology inherent in 
ICU nursing work:
You have to actually use your stethoscope yourself. 
You have to count their [the patient’s] respirations. 
You have to feel their pulse. You have to um, do a 
manual blood pressure. You have to talk to them. You 
have to reassure the relatives and then you have to 
build a case and take it to the doctors and explain it 
in a clinical and professional way. I think that’s a really 
important skill to have 
[Kath, Line. 435–439] (Whittam, 2018, pp. 93-94).
Additionally, SRNs wanted to be able to mitigate the emotional im-
pact on NGNs from the ICU environment:
The SRNs proposed that NGNs gaining experience in another 
clinical area's ‘backyard’ before working in ICU would reduce feelings 
of stress in both groups. Yet, variance existed among participants; 
some considered ICU an unsuitable environment for any RN without 
12 months of acute nursing experience, while others supposed an 
ICU placement more suitable as a second rotation, provided ample 
resources were available to enable continuous NGN support and 
supervision:
The SRNs demonstrated care towards NGNs, using empathy and 
concern for influencing NGN development in a clinically and emotion-
ally safe way.
Stories from SRNs working with NGNs in ICU told of experiences 
that balanced pressure from the critical nature of the place and so-
ciality commonplace of this inquiry, framing the development of ex-
pertise within the ICU nursing team. The stories were bounded by 
their temporal nature and the temporality of the 6-month ICU place-
ment at the beginning of a nursing career.
As one part of the solution to the nursing shortage, NGNs are re-
cruited to work in ICUs. This inquiry sought to explore SRNs’ experi-
ences working with NGNs in ICU. Knowing the critical and pressured 
environment of ICU and holding the belief that NGNs are not ad-
equately prepared to nurse safely in this context, SRNs suggest that 
NGNs gain initial experience elsewhere. The SRNs felt responsible 
for patient safety yet perceive time and resource impediments to 
their surveillance of NGNs. In this context, SRNs rely on NGNs’ initi-
ative to seek help; however, SRNs suspect that NGNs’ reluctance to 
ask questions may indicate they are trying to conceal deficits in their 
knowledge. Despite the perceived burden of NGNs in ICU, SRNs find 
their contribution to NGN development rewarding.
The ICU RN shortage has impelled ICUs to employ NGNs. It 
is reported 23.3% of NGNs are employed in critical care areas in 
the USA after registration (National Council of State Boards of 
Nursing [NCSBN], 2018). In this inquiry and other reports (Ballem 
& MacIntosh, 2014; Baumberger-Henry, 2012; O'Kane, 2012), SRNs 
raised concerns regarding the inadequate preparation of NGNs, 
limiting their capacity to nurse high-acuity patients. Lack of ward 
experience may hinder NGNs’ development in ICU (O'Kane, 2012). 
Experience in clinical areas with limited technology provides NGNs 
with opportunities to embed comprehensive nursing assessment 
skills: ‘accountability, responsibility and the ability to prioritise’ 
(O'Kane, 2012, p. 49). The finding of perceived NGN unprepared-
ness aligns with other studies recommending that NGNs should 
gain experience in ICU as a student (O'Kane, 2012). As higher acuity 
patients are increasingly managed in generalist wards, graduating 
nurses should have exposure to the knowledge and skill set neces-
sary to manage critical patients wherever they are located (Williams 
& Palmer, 2014). However, providing ICU clinical placements for 
nursing students increases pressure on SRNs to deliver quality clin-
ical education and supervision (Mould et al., 2011). The placement 
of nursing students in ICU raised SRN concerns which mirror those 
described in this inquiry when reflecting on the NGN experience: 
staff shortages and balancing time for patient care with teaching 
(Carlson et al., 2010).
In this inquiry, SRNs recognised their vital role in the surveillance 
of inexperienced NGNs, ‘carrying’ them by intervening when re-
quired to rescue ICU patients from harm. However, SRNs perceived 
that increased patient acuity and lean staffing levels, both in numbers 
and skill mix, impede capacity to provide adequate surveillance and 
assistance. Twigg et al., (2013) emphasise patient safety ‘can only be 
realised if there are sufficient nurses to provide appropriate care’ (p. 
544). High nurse workloads in ICU result in poorer patient outcomes, 
increased mortality and hospital-acquired complications (Gurses, 
Carayon, & Wall, 2009). Healthier work environments are associated 
with better quality of care patient outcomes and significantly lower 
odds of job dissatisfaction and nurse burnout (Aiken et al., 2011). 
Staffing issues are complex in ICU. The AACN (2016) recommend 
basing RN staffing levels on aggregate patient acuity rather than 
inflexible nurse-to-patient ratios and total patient numbers. Static 
ratios disregard variability in patient acuity and needs, the status of 
the dynamic ICU work environment and individual nurse capability. 
We found that SRNs noted the lack of ‘ACCESS’ RNs in the inquiry 
place. Adequate staffing resources to manage SRN workload, max-
imise patient safety and optimise ICU bed utility may be achieved 
by rostering the recommended ‘ACCESS’ RNs (Chamberlain et al., 
2018, p. 297), providing NGNs with better access to, including con-
sultation and education time with, SRNs. Despite this, policies for 
employing additional SRNs are compromised by both sustained ICU 
nursing workforce shortages and imposed hospital budget austerity 
measures (Willis et al., 2017).
Communication errors are one of the main causes of adverse 
events in hospitals (Slade et al., 2019). In this inquiry, SRNs specu-
lated that sometimes NGNs concealed their clinical experience and 
knowledge levels and seemed reluctant to seek guidance because 
of embarrassment, fear and the presence of patients’ families. This 
finding is supported by Saghafi et al., (2012) who reported that ICU 
NGNs tried to conceal their lack of experience from patients and 
their families, supposing their novice status could influence the de-
gree of confidence in their capability to deliver patient care. The 
NGNs’ goals of independence inhibited them from asking questions 
and seeking SRN’s advice (Baumberger-Henry, 2012). In view of the 
demanding workload in ICU and perceived NGN unpreparedness, 
SRNs noted the significance of NGNs asking questions and request-
ing guidance, observing there may be increased risk of patient error 
when NGNs failed to do so. A lack of NGN questions reduced SRN 
capacity to amend workloads to provide necessary NGN surveil-
lance, support and education.
Despite increased workloads, and associated stress and pres-
sure working with NGNs, SRNs spoke of their determination to be 
approachable and supportive. Recognising that initial experiences 
in nursing could impact NGNs’ future careers, SRNs actively cared 
for NGNs, intending to make NGNs’ ICU placement a positive ex-
perience. However, our findings contrast with studies describing 
unsupportive SRN behaviours (Baumberger-Henry, 2012; Parker 
et al., 2014), such as ignoring or remaining silent when witness-
ing non-constructive interactions with NGNs. An explanation for 
the divergence in findings may be variances in workplace culture, 
nursing leadership capability and resource availability between re-
search sites.
High nursing workloads and the resulting stress may jeopardise 
patient safety due to increased burn out rates, the negative effects 
on communication, reduced staff motivation and decreased job 
satisfaction (Dilig-Ruiz et al., 2018; Hoonakker et al., 2011; Moss 
et al., 2016). In this inquiry, and other studies (Ballem & MacIntosh, 
2014; Baumberger-Henry, 2012; O'Kane, 2012), SRNs report feel-
ing stressed and overwhelmed working alongside NGNs in the ICU. 
Particular to this inquiry, SRNs’ revelations of experiences of irri-
tability, tiredness and labile emotions may be indicators of burnout 
syndrome, which is linked to increased intention to leave, resignation 
and absenteeism rates (Aiken et al., 2012). Other factors contribut-
ing to burnout rates, for example, patient mortality and ICU length 
of stay (Merlani et al., 2011) and the presence of conflict (Merlani 
et al., 2011) are multifaceted issues and challenging to address. 
Avoidance of burnout syndrome could be considered an important 
quality improvement target. Hospitals need to generate workplace 
cultures and models of operation that appreciate SRNs’ workload, 
via recognition, appropriate staffing and leadership support (Olds 
et al., 2017). We found that SRNs sought managerial recognition re-
garding the work involved and the parallel pressures of supporting 
NGNs while ensuring ICU patient safety. Performance evaluations 
are an opportune time for ICU nurse leaders to recognise the role of 
SRNs and the concomitant increased workload when they are edu-
cating and supervising NGNs (Ballem & MacIntosh, 2014). Frequent 
informal feedback is directly associated with lower turnover (Van 
Waeyenberg et al., 2015). We recommend that SRNs’ workloads be 
reviewed regularly and potentially modified as targets for improve-
ment interventions. As sufficient staffing and personnel resources 
are positively associated with ICU RNs’ job satisfaction (Dilig-Ruiz 
et al., 2018) and, conversely, job stress, burnout and emotional ex-
haustion is negatively associated (Dilig-Ruiz et al., 2018), this is an 
area for further research. However, high stress factors inherent to 
ICU RNs roles, such as managing life-threatening illnesses and sup-
porting families experiencing extreme loss and stress, may not be 
amenable to staffing approaches alone.
Networking and educational opportunities, as protected time 
away from clinical duties, improve job satisfaction and create pos-
itive experiences for those in similar roles (Goss, 2015). We recom-
mend that nurse managers and organisational leaders enable SRNs 
access to education and communities of practice that specifically 
support the domains of their role. An emphasis on adult learning the-
ory, evaluation and performance appraisal approaches, methods for 
providing and accepting constructive feedback, advanced communi-
cation and negotiation skills would be valuable in providing the skill 
set SRNs need to provide NGN clinical supervision (Powers et al., 
2019). However, the complexity of ICU environments, ICU RN turn-
over and shortages, and financial constraints curtails opportunities 
for planned or spontaneous professional development (Alshahrani, 
2020). Nonetheless, SRNs expressed the desire to be acknowledged 
and the need to be supported in their contribution to the develop-
ment of NGNs.
One measurement of success of the Transition to Professional 
Practice programme is when NGNs remain working in ICU after 
completion. Intention to stay in ICU is related to the NGNs’ not 
being required to practice in clinical conditions outside their ca-
pacity. Two significant and independent predictors of NGNs’ in-
tention to remain in critical care areas are ‘high satisfaction with 
unit orientation’ and ‘high satisfaction with clinical supervision’ 
(Hussein et al., 2019, p. 400). This inquiry place induction pro-
gramme offers substantially less support time to NGNs than other 
ICU orientation and transition programmes presented in the liter-
ature (Bortolotto, 2015; Friedman et al., 2011), which document 
12–26 weeks duration (Bortolotto, 2015; Friedman et al., 2011). 
Additionally, NGN ICU supernumerary periods differ in the litera-
ture, ranging from periods of 8-weeks (O'Kane, 2012) to an entire 
3-month rotation (Missen et al., 2016). We recommend well- 
resourced NGN ICU orientation and supernumerary programmes 
that deliver sustained clinical supervision, graded entry to ICU 
nursing responsibility, didactic education and realistic workloads. 
There is some evidence that ICU induction programmes are cost- 
effective in terms of reduced turnover and increased RN retention 
(Friedman et al., 2011). Decreased nursing leadership appreciation 
of the benefits of well- esourced and extended NGN ICU orienta-
tion and supernumerary programmes, as well as fiscal limitations, 
may affect both SRNs’ and NGNs’ workloads; compromising the 
capability to provide safe and effective patient care. Collaboration 
with academic nursing faculty may help nursing educators and 
managers develop and evaluate evidence-based programmes, with 
the dual function of increasing support for SRNs and NGNs while 
expanding undergraduate curriculum content to include current 
understanding of complex clinical areas such as ICU (Mårtensson 
et al., 2013). Further research is needed on NGN ICU Transition 
to Professional Practice programmes to emphasise both SRN and 
NGN experiences, establish the financial and educational out-
comes, and consider constraints when comparing ICUs (due to 
variances in ICU nursing staffing, financial and health organisation 
models, and patient cohorts).
We found that SRNs nurture NGNs, influenced by their own 
early nursing experience (temporality), their commitment to the nurs-
ing profession (sociality) and the satisfaction of contributing to NGN 
professional growth in the ICU context (place).
Although the narrative inquiry sociality commonplace brings the re-
lationship between the inquirer (SW) and SRN participants to the 
forefront, this is a potential limitation via perceptions of status and 
power impeding the inquirer's access to, and analysis of, SRNs’ ex-
perience. However, reflexivity was practised in peer-debriefing re-
search team meetings and documented in field notes throughout 
the inquiry.
The inquiry was conducted at a single site where a homoge-
nous cohort of five participants self-selected; therefore, the ex-
periences presented may not reflect those of SRNs in other ICUs 
and are not envisaged for generalisation. Narrative inquiry re-
search texts are richly textured and represent the complex stories 
of experience lived and told by participants alongside the primary 
inquirer; honouring NI’s ontology of experience. Enrolling a rep-
resentative and larger sample of nurses to produce generalisable 
themes would have a required a different methodology (Clandinin 
& Connelly, 2000).
To fulfil the requirements of this Higher Research Degree proj-
ect, milestones had to be reached within pre-determined time-
frames. This limited the capacity of the primary inquirer to hear and 
be attentive to more than five participant stories regarding the phe-
nomenon under inquiry.
The potential limitations are ameliorated, and trustworthiness 
enhanced, by presenting the SRNs’ narrative accounts, allowing 
readers their own interpretations and application to other settings 
[sociality] (Appendix S2). The narrative accounts and threads pre-
sented in the findings highlight ‘the temporal, unfolding, contextual 
nature of the threads rather than the certainty of the threads as 
fixed, frozen, or context (life) independent’ (Clandinin, 2013, p.143).
Although limiting ICU employment to RNs with acute nursing 
experience may not be possible in the current healthcare en-
vironment, there is an essential need to generate and maintain 
healthy ICU workplaces. Therefore, we recommend reducing 
SRNs’ workloads when they are supporting NGNs and develop-
ing evidence-based, designed, evaluated and well-resourced NGN 
ICU orientation and supernumerary programmes. Furthermore, a 
combination of managerial recognition, access to academic col-
laboration and education that enhance SRNs’ education capacity 
and staffing that reflects total patient acuity may better support 
both the SRNs and NGNs.
This inquiry adds to existing nursing knowledge by making visible 
the SRNs’ ICU experience. ‘Readers of this current inquiry are in-
vited to immerse themselves in the three-dimensional space; open-
ing up new possibilities for different stories of SRNs’ experiences 
with NGNs in the ICU to be lived and told’ (Whittam, 2018, p. 121).
The findings of this inquiry have implications for policy decisions 
regarding NGN placement in ICU on a Transition to Professional 
Practice programme. The NGNs enter the high-acuity, unpredict-
able ICU environment with a recognised gap between their existing 
clinical competence and the nursing requirements of ICU patients. 
Regarding ICU patient safety and quality of care, SRNs serve an es-
sential role by providing surveillance, supervision and support while 
NGNs are delivering nursing care. However, SRNs perceive that they 
do not have enough resources to adequately support NGNs develop 
their clinical competence in the ICU, which may have implications 
for the quality of patient care provided. Although there may be fi-
nancial implications for ICUs and healthcare organisations, staffing 
decisions should be informed by the match between the total clinical 
competence of the ICU nursing team and the needs of ICU patients, 
to achieve best patient outcomes while sustaining healthy work en-
vironments. The clinical capacity of NGNs at the start of their career, 
SRNs’ workloads and ICU nursing staffing levels, is important fac-
tors to consider when designing and evaluating NGNs ICU induction 
and supernumerary programmes. Through SRNs’ stories of experi-
ence, this inquiry has provided an understanding of the ramifications 
for SRNs as they work with, care for and guide the development of 
NGNs in ICU.
We acknowledge the Senior Registered Nurses who participated in 
this inquiry by sharing the ‘gift’ of their stories of experience.
The authors declare no conflict of interest in this work.
All authors have confirmed that all authors meet the ICMJE crite-
ria for authorship credit (http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/ 
browse/roles-and-respo nsibi lities/defining- he-role-of-authors- 
and-contr butors.html) as follows:
The data that support the findings of this study are available from 
the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Susan Whittam https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6559-3228 
for establishing and sustaining healthy work environments: A journey 
analysis: Linking the NCLEX-RN examination to practice: U.S. and 
St Clair, M. (2013). New graduate nurses’ experiences of transition during 
orientation into critical care (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from 
Whittam, S. (2018). Narratives of experience: Senior registered nurses 
working with new graduate nurses in the intensive care unit (Master of 
Additional supporting information may be found online in the 
Supporting Information section.
How to cite this article: Whittam S, Torning N, Patching J. A 
narrative inquiry approach to understanding senior intensive 
care nurses’ experiences of working with new graduate 
nurses. J Clin Nurs. 2021;00:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1111/
