Title:
Drug use among youth and adults in a population-based 
survey in South Africa
Abstract:
Illicit drug use is a growing public health problem. The estimated global prevalence of illicit drug 
use (including amphetamines, cannabis, cocaine, opioids, etc.) is 5.3% in the past year in 2014.1,2 
The most commonly used illicit drugs globally are cannabis, amphetamine-type stimulants, 
cocaine and opioids.2 Illicit drug use contributes significantly to the global burden of disease, 
that is 0.8% in 2010.3
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Method
 Data and sampling
 Ethical consideration
 Results
 Sample characteristics and prevalence of 
drug use
 Limitations
 Conclusion
 Competing interests
 Authors’ contributions


Text:
----------------------
Method
Data and sampling
Cross-sectional data from the ‘2012 South African national HIV 
prevalence, incidence, and behaviour survey’ was analysed.13 
The sampling strategy was stratified by province, type of 
geolocality and predominant population or racial groups. 
Using multistage sampling, a random sample of ‘enumeration 
areas’ was selected, and within enumeration areas households 
were randomly selected. All individuals within a household 
were eligible to participate. Trained and supervised field 
workers interview-administered a questionnaire. Informed 
consent was attained prior to the conduct of the interview. The 
detailed survey methods are described elsewhere.13
Drug use in the past 3 months was assessed with 10 items of 
the ‘Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening 
Test (ASSIST)’, e.g. ‘In the past 3 months, how often have you 
used cannabis (dagga, marijuana, pot, grass, hash, etc.)?’14 
This included the item ‘Besides drugs prescribed by a health 
professional, have you ever used a drug by injection?’ The 
response option was ‘never’, ‘Yes. In the past 3 months’ and 
‘Yes, but not in the past 3 months’. One item was added 
‘Whoonga (mixture of heroin, dagga = cannabis and 
antiretrovirals)’.13 Response options ranged from 1 = never to 
5 = almost daily. Any drug use in the past 3 months was 
coded as 1 and never as 0. All items were added together to 
indicate the prevalence of any illicit drug use in the past 
3 months. Cronbach’s alpha for this section of the ASSIST in 
this sample was 0.61.
Demographic measures included age, educational level, race 
(African black people or other races), geolocality, province 
and employment status.
Psychological distress was measured with the ‘Kessler 
Psychological Distress Scale (K-10)’.15 The 10-item scale 
assesses global psychological distress experienced in the past 
30 days, e.g. ‘In the past 30 days, how often did you feel so 
restless that you could not sit still?’ Response options ranged 
from 1 = ‘none of the time’ to 5 = ‘all the time’. These scores 
were added up, with higher total scores indicating higher 
psychological distress.15 A cut-off of 16 scores and more for 
detecting depression and anxiety disorders was used, as 
suggested in a previous validation study of the K-10 in the 
general population in South Africa.16 Cronbach’s alpha for 
the K-10 in this sample was 0.89.
10-item ‘Alcohol Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT)’, e.g. 
‘How often did you have a drink containing alcohol in the 
past 12 months?’17 Response options ranged from 0 to 4, with 
a summed total range from 0 to 40 scores; a score of 8 or more 
indicated hazardous or harmful or probable dependent 
drinking.17 Cronbach’s alpha for the AUDIT in this sample 
was 0.84.
Violent crime victimisation was assessed with the question, 
‘In the past 12 months, have you been a victim of a violent 
crime where a gun or knife was used to threaten or harm 
you?’ Response option was ‘yes’ or ‘no’.13
Sexual risk behaviour was assessed with two questions. 
(1) ‘Have you had sex during the past 12 months?’ 
(2) ‘Overall, how many sexual partners did you have 
during the past 12 months?’ (coded two or more = 1 and 
0 to 1 sexual partner = 0).13
Descriptive statistics were used to summarise drug 
use prevalence, sociodemographic factors and health 
variables. Associations between the outcome variable of any 
past 3-month drug use (cannabis, cocaine, amphetamine, 
inhalants, sedatives, hallucinogens or opiates including 
Whoonga), sociodemographic and health risk-independent 
variables were examined by calculating odds ratios. 
Unconditional multivariable logistic regression was utilised 
to assess the impact of explanatory variables for the outcome 
of past 3-month drug use prevalence, for women and men 
separately. All variables that were statistically significant at 
the p < 0.05 levels in bivariate analyses were included in the 
multivariable models. In the article, weighted percentages 
are presented. The ‘svy’ command was utilised to take into 
account the multistage cluster design of the survey. All 
statistical analyses were performed by using Stata software 
version 12 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA).
Ethical consideration
This analysis is based on data on individuals aged 15 years 
and older who participated in the survey. The study survey 
proposal was approved by the ‘HSRC Research Ethics 
Committee (REC: 5/17/11/10)’ and by the ‘Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention’ (CDC).
Results
Sample characteristics and prevalence of 
drug use
Response rates for the interview was 89.5%.13 The total 
sample included 26 453 persons aged 15 years and older, 
52.0% women and 48.0% men. More than half of the 
participants (52.0%) were between 15 and 34 years old, 40.2% 
had Grade 12 or more education, 77.8% were from the African 
black population group, 39.3% were formally or informally 
employed and 51.9% lived in urban formal areas. A large 
proportion of the participants (37.8%) reported psychological 
distress, 11.1% hazardous or harmful or probable dependent 
alcohol use, 14.7% had become victim of a violent crime in 
the past 12 months and 19.1% had more than one sexual 
partner in the past 12 months.
Overall, the past 3-month of any drug use was 4.4%, 7.9% 
among men and 1.3% among women. The proportion of the 
past 3-month cannabis use was 4.0%, followed by ‘sedatives
or sleeping pills (Valium, Mandrax, Serepax, Rohypnol, 
etc.)’ 0.4%, amphetamine-type stimulants (speed, ecstasy, 
tik, etc.) 0.3%, ‘cocaine (coke, rocks, crack, etc.)’ 0.3%, 
‘opiates (heroin, morphine, methadone, codeine, Whoonga 
[mixture of heroin, cannabis and alleged antiretrovirals], 
etc.)’ 0.3%, ‘inhalants (nitrates, glue, petrol, paint, thinners, 
etc.)’ 0.2%, and ‘hallucinogens (lysergic acid diethylamide
[LSD], acid, mushrooms, Phencyclidine [PCP], Special K, 
etc.)’ 0.1%. The prevalence of past 3-month drug by 
injection was 0.6%, and the use of Whoonga 0.2%. Among 
the nine South African provinces, any past 3-month drug 
use was the highest in the Western Cape (7.1%), followed 
by the Free State (6.3%), Northern Cape (5.2%) and Gauteng 
(4.9%) (see Table 1).
survey in the US (past month 10.1%).4 Among the different 
drugs used, the highest past 3-month prevalence was for 
cannabis (4.0%), as found in the 2008 South Africa survey 
(3.3%)5 and also in other countries such as the US.4 Compared 
to the 2008 South Africa national survey,5 in this 2012 survey 
the prevalence of past 3-month use increased from 3.3% to 
4.0% for cannabis use, while it decreased for sedatives or 
sleeping pills from 0.8% to 0.4%, amphetamine-type stimulants 
0.7% to 0.3%, cocaine 0.6% to 0.3%, opiates 0.5% to 0.3%, 
hallucinogens from 0.5% to 0.1% and inhalants from 0.5% to 
0.2%.5 The increase in the prevalence of past 3-month drug use 
from 2008 to 2012 seems to be even higher among the youth 
(15–24 years) from 4.2% to 5.7%. This seems to show that the 
increase in any drug use is mainly attributed to an increase in 
cannabis use and a decrease in poly drug use (two or more 
drugs) from 0.7% in 2008 to 0.5% in 2012. The increase in the 
prevalence of cannabis use may be attributed to lower costs 
and better accessibility than the other drugs. One review18
indicates a global increase in substance use, including illicit 
drug use, in particular among young people, emphasising the 
importance of interventions. The use of Whoonga does not 
seem to be insignificant. In a qualitative study:
The use of amphetamine-type stimulants including tik and 
others had been as high as 2.2% in the Western Cape 
province in the 2008 survey,5 but was only 0.8% in the 
Western Cape in this survey, which may indicate some form 
of control as compared to previously.20 The increase in the 
use of drugs by injection from 0.3% in 2008 to 0.6% in 2012 
is of concern. A study of 450 people who inject drugs (PWID) 
in South Africa found that they engaged in high HIV risk 
behaviour, including 49.0% having ‘used contaminated 
injecting equipment the last time they injected’.21
As found in previous studies,5,6,7,22 including in South Africa, 
the prevalence of drug use was significantly higher among 
men than women. Further, in agreement with some previous 
studies,5,6 this study found that younger age and being from 
the mixed race population group were associated with drug 
use. Unemployment was among men in bivariate analysis 
associated with drug use, as found in some previous studies.5
In agreement with previous reviews,8,9,10,11,12 this study 
found that hazardous or harmful or probable dependent 
alcohol use among both men and women, having had 
more than one sexual partner in the past 12 months among 
men, having been victim of violent crime among men and 
psychological distress (anxiety and depression) among 
women were associated with drug use. Drug use prevention 
and intervention have to include co-morbidity factors such as 
common mental disorders, alcohol use disorders and sexual 
risk behaviour.
Limitations
This study was cross-sectional and no causative conclusions 
between independent variables and drug use can be drawn. 
The data on drug use were collected by self-report and may 
underreport the true consumption rate.23 Furthermore, the 
internal consistency of the ASSIST questionnaire for the drug 
use section was only moderate (0.61). Possible reasons for 
this may be that alcohol and tobacco use were not assessed as 
part of the ASSIST and an additional item (Whoonga use) had 
been added. Further, the ASSIST assesses methadone as an 
opioid, while technically it is a synthetic opioid.
Conclusion
An increase of any illicit drug use prevalence rates was 
observed from 2008 to 2012 in South Africa. Prevention 
and intervention activities targeting illicit drug use, in 
particular in identified risk groups, need to be strengthened 
in South Africa.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced 
them in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
K.P. and N.P.M. designed the study. K.P. analysed the data 
and wrote the draft article. All authors read and approved 
the final article.
