Title:
Development and Peace
Through Traditional,
Cultural, Islamic Mediation
Abstract:
Abstract
In a world filled with conflict, competition, and war, those who work for peace shape the character
of human existence at the local level. The lives and petitions of individuals who work to reduce the
ravages of conflict create profound effects and deserve attention and study. In the last two decades
of international politics, violence in Islamic societies in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, Sudan, and else-
where has gained global public attention. However, the international media frequently does see the
local-level initiatives to promote peace in traditional Islamic societies. Many people, whether in
humanitarian nongovernmental organisation operations, or as part of a military-led reconstruction
team, have worked and poured treasure into promoting stability in traditional societies suffering
from insecurity. Understanding the resources for peace offered in Islam and the way in which
Muslims work for peace in their communities can empower those who seek to help and protect
them from strategic errors.
----------------------
Subtitles:
 Seeking Peace at the Local Level
 Roots of Peace in the Example of the Prophet
 Character and Reputation
 Variation in Local Practices and the Power of Symbolism
 Conclusion


Text:
----------------------
Keywords
local, traditional, cultural, Islamic mediation, conciliation, reputation, conflict resolution, character
Seeking Peace at the Local Level
Given the ubiquity of quarrels and competition, traditional societies develop practices and proce-
dures for dispute resolution. When outside parties enter, they become part of the dynamic of local
relations. Offenses by foreigners come easily, but their efforts to resolve problems in ways that
work in their home societies do not work as well in a traditional Muslim society. Therefore,
whether seeking to make amends for an offence, or pursuing peace for the sake of aiding devel-
opment, everyone who works in a Muslim society should become familiar with the local tradi-
tions of conflict resolution.
This work does not offer a theoretical analysis but rather seeks to extend awareness, and offer exam-
ples applying the work of Funk (2014), Abu-Nimer (2014), Irani & Funk (2001), and Funk & Said
(2009). It promotes three major applications for the outsider seeking to support local conflict media-
tion: (1) develop cultural awareness; (2) develop respect for Muslims; and (3) in each place, ask the
questions, “What rituals do people here use to resolve conflicts” and “Who has a reputation for med-
iating conflicts?” Discussion of seeking peace in the broad area of Muslim majority societies,
encompassing about 57 countries, with many different languages, civilizations, and different doc-
trines and divisions, such as Sunni, Shi’a, Ibadi, and Sufism, necessarily includes a great diversity
of practices. The examples offered here, ranging from Afghanistan to Jordan, Morocco, Somaliland,
Tajikistan and Turkey, represent an effort to show the value of similar principles and practices across
a wide range of societies, despite other aspects of social differences.
Local-level conflict resolution deserves attention for several crucial reasons. Local conditions rep-
resent the core life experiences for Muslims in a traditional society. The principles of Islamic med-
iation have great impact at the local level, so a stronger understanding of these principles can help
both Muslims and non-Muslims enhance human dignity and well-being. As Hayman (2013) con-
cludes from a review of peacebuilding, “Locally-led peacebuilding offers advantages over
internationally-led initiatives for fostering self-help, relevance and sustainability” (p. 17). She notes
that international organisations lack awareness of the importance of local capacity to mediate con-
flict (Hayman, 2013:21). She concludes that only locally rooted, relevant endeavours hold the dur-
able commitment of the people who need help. Kalyvas (2003) has given a plethora of examples to
document how local conflicts, teeming with bitterness and desires for revenge, frequently animate
and become intermingled with larger political projects, issues of ethnic conflict, and civil wars.
Given the significance of local conflicts for the people involved, for those who seek greater human
welfare in Muslim societies, and for security and stability at the regional level, local practices of
mediation and conflict resolution carry great importance today. This article uses the word “local”
to mean that particular place where someone wants to promote peace, whether they work for a non-
governmental organisation (NGO) in aid, relief and development, healthcare, or even providing
security assistance to the government.
In the context of traditional Muslim societies, local traditions of mediation and conflict resolution
vary in their terminology, the content of rituals for reconciliation, preferences for mediation by a
single individual or a group, and the methods of enforcing decisions. Although mediators draw gui-
dance and inspiration from a common treasury of examples and doctrine, their application of Islamic
principles characteristically bears the distinctive imprint of local custom. This word “traditional”
describes a society in which people use the values and rituals they learned from their fathers and
grandfathers. These societies emphasise relationships and community, in contrast to the individua-
listic, task orientation common in the West. As Funk (2014) explains it, “The forms of conflict med-
iation presented here seek, not merely peace as the absence of conflict, but more importantly
“restorative justice,” meaning the reintegration of the offender back into the community, after
accepting responsibility, and making reparations, in a public ritual that allows all sides to recover
their dignity, thereby preventing cycles of retribution.”
Despite the patriarchy commonly found in Muslim societies, women of dynamic intellect and
distinctive personality, like the famous woman Sufi, Rabi’a of Basra, do influence their societ-
ies (Keddie, 1987; Schimmel, 1982). Kadiayifci-Orellana and Sharify-Funk (2010) have written
very persuasively on the role of Muslim women in peacebuilding. USAID (2011) has publicised
how networks of older women use Islamic law and local custom to resolve family level
disputes).
However, in the context of traditional societies like Afghanistan, men play the dominant role in
society, and the customs of patriarchy exercise a strong hold over popular sentiment (Irani,
1999). In discussing the fact that women have to get permission from their husbands for every-
thing, Gang notes, “Women’s subordinate status is not solely a product of community norms in
the research sites, but rather is consistent with prevailing gender roles and relations in Afgha-
nistan more generally” (p. 22). The older men normally solve conflicts within a family, and
when larger scale conflicts arise, people chose older men as mediators, who hold a reputation
for piety, honour, interpersonal skills, and knowledge of local history, customs, and traditions
(p. 19).
The effectiveness of traditional methods of mediation and conciliation in Muslim societies
raises the questions, “From what sources did these practices develop? On what foundations
do mediators base their work?” Traditional conflict mediation in Muslim societies rests on the
example of the Prophet Muhammad, on many verses in the Qur’an, and on historical examples
of noble individuals. Moussalli (2001) notes that this derives from a principle of Islamic prac-
tice: “For most Muslims, be they modernists, fundamentalists or traditionalists, the introduc-
tion or development of theoretical principles or practical doctrines cannot be abstractly
justified, but must be referred directly or analogically to past ‘authentic’ principles and doc-
trines” (p. 144).
Roots of Peace in the Example of the Prophet
Ahmad Moussalli describes historical Islamic principles of arbitration, or tahkim, as rooted in tra-
ditional Arab practices, and exemplified in the personal example of the Prophet (p. 145). Histori-
cally, “each tribe had its own arbitrators who were known for their good judgment and knowledge
of tribal customs and were also respected for their justice, fairness, and superior moral qualities.
Some arbitrators were women” (Moussalli 2001: 145). He observes that in pre-Islamic history,
“arbitrators were not necessarily tribal chiefs, but men of understanding who had knowledge
of traditions and customs, so even some Christian priests played the role of arbitrators in pre-
Islamic Arabia, though not in their capacities as men of religion” (p. 146). Therefore, he argues
that this tradition of arbitration forms the cultural context in which the Prophet Muhammad built
his reputation as a man who sought peace. Moussalli records that, “Before his prophethood,
Muhammad became known as an honest arbitrator” (p. 148). Furthermore, Muhammad did not
just judge between Muslims, but he also applied Jewish law for offenses within the Jewish com-
munity. Although Moussalli uses the term “arbitration,” today this term carries a connotation of
greater formality, in which the arbitrator holds legal authority to impose a judgement in the dis-
pute. In contrast, most of the following examples represent mediation, in which the process is
open, more informal, and seeks to restore peaceful relations within a community, a practice of
conciliation and “restorative justice.”
Mohammed Abu-Nimer provides a strong argument tracing the roots of peacebuilding to the example
of the Prophet during the 13 years of nonviolent struggle and resistance.
The conditions under which the community moved from Mecca to Medina provide more instruction
on principles of mediation. Funk and Said (2009) note that, “the contending tribes of Yathrib (future
Medina) invited him Muhammad to migrate to their city and arbitrate their many conflicts” (p. 79).
Under the Constitution of Medina, both Jews and Arabs became collective citizens of the new polit-
ical community.
Understanding Islamic doctrines regarding peacebuilding requires recognising exceptions to the
stereotype that the verses of the Quran given during the Muslims’ sojourn in Medina promote violence
and conflict. In Medina, the Muslims did fight battles, but Muslims argue that this does not mean the
verses of the Qur’an dating to the Medina period lack support for peacebuilding. In addition to the cul-
tural heritage of Arab arbitration, and the example of the prophet, Islamic peacebuilding rests on a doc-
trine regarding the acceptance of diversity. Hashmi (2001) argues that “[Instead] of steadily moving
toward an attitude of war with other religious communities, the Medinan chapters contain many
injunctions on toleration, including the most significant verse on this topic: ‘Let there be no compul-
sion in religion; truth stands out clear from error’” (p. 116).
Peacemaking in Islam restson thevirtues,habits of character,andtemperament necessary forovercoming
differences, and the bitterness created in conflict (Thistlethwaite & Stassen, 2008). In the absence of
patience and humility, offenses arise easily. The Muslim who seeks peace finds the roots of every good
and necessary virtue in the guidance of the Qur’an. For example, Abu-Nimer (2010) notes the roots of
conflict resolution in Qur’an 16:90: “Repel evil [not with evil] but with something better (ahsan)—that
is, with forgiveness and amnesty” (p. 82). The mediator must also have a reputation for humility. He
furthermore cites the Qur’an 5:2 to say that Muslims should not be involved in violence at all and should
settle conflicts peacefully (Abu Nimer, 2010, p. 83). This leads him to describe the importance of media-
tors,intervening in disputesto prevent a spiral of escalatingviolence: “whenathirdparty is part of a peace-
building intervention, it is mainly to facilitate communication, reduce tension, and assist in rebuilding
relationships” (Abu Nimer, 2010, p. 83).All of this follows strong instructionin the Qur’an for mediation:
In addition to the Qur’an, Muslims also trace the foundations of peacebuilding to specific hadith,
meaning reports or traditions regarding the Prophet (Thistlethwaite & Stassen, 2008).
What if the local peacemaker, or group of “white beards” who mediate conflicts, lacks the education
and level of knowledge to access all the treasury of peacebuilding skills and ideas available in Islam?
By their character and sense of duty, people who desire peace tend to seek the knowledge and
resources to reconcile opponents. They seek to garner wisdom from local experience, to gain credibil-
ity and charisma. In a traditional Muslim society, mediators with a reputation for humility, honour, and
piety will draw inspiration and knowledge from local history and traditions, as well as the Qur’an,
hadith, and the Sunnah (the path or example of the Prophet). They work to develop their reputation
as an “honest broker” for people involved in a dispute.
reports that Nursi gained a reputation for an article in which he wrote that, “Hatred should only be
directed to ignorance, poverty and hypocrisy” (Saritoprak, 2010, p. 101). His example further rein-
forces how those who promote social peace enable human development.
The stories of Abdul Ghaffar Khan and Bediuzzaman Said Nursi illustrate peacebuilders who drew
inspiration from the example of the Prophet and the words of the Qur’an. For those who may have
no impression of Islam, except what they have heard from news reports of violence, the foundations
of peacebuilding in Islam represent a welcome surprise and a source of new insight which deserves
understanding and awareness.
Character and Reputation
In the documentary Afghan Stories, a young Tajik man named Walied Osman visits Faisabad, where
he has the great fortune of being the guest of Hajji Ahmed Shamsiddin, a town elder. Osman
describes him as one of the most revered men in Faisabad. “You know when you are in the presence
of a great man. He has presence. He has energy. There is an aura about him” (Afghan Stories, 2003).
The director, Taran Davies, describes Shamsiddin as renowned for his work during the Soviet occu-
pation of Afghanistan, as the region’s most recognised peacemaker. Shamsiddin describes his work
in interceding for the protection of Faisabad from the Mujahidin that wanted to expel the Russians
who controlled the city.
The “presence” that Osman describes derives from Shamsiddin’s character and reputation. Huda
(2010) notes that in the Islamic context, this derives from piety and devotion:
One of the early classics of social anthropology, Saints of the Atlas by Ernest Gellner, gave explicit
recognition to the role of leaders and teachers in Sufi orders as mediators. Gellner (1969) studied a
group of “professionally neutral, obligatorily pacific, saints-arbitrators” (p. 34). Gellner observed
that the society he studied had been stable for 300 years under the social system in which people
went to the local saint for mediation of their disputes (p. 278). These saints had set up lodges in
places where the borders of two or more tribes would meet. They built their most important lodges
in places of previous conflicts, such as the point on the route used by nomadic groups as they would
bring their herds across the territory of farmers in highland areas. Gellner explained the role of these
mediators in very functional terms. He noted that the mediators had to render rulings in accordance
with the local norms and customs, rather than strictly according to the standards of Sharia, or they
would lose their status (p. 149).
Variation in Local Practices and the Power of Symbolism
Even though a broad variety of societies make the foundations of Islam the guiding principles of social
life, different Islamic cultures demonstrate a great deal of variation in customs for conflict resolution.
Therefore, Abu-Nimer (2001) argues,
In contrast to conflict mediation in a Western context, practiced by the paid, professionally trained
expert in legal procedures, a mediator using traditional practices in the Middle East needs primarily
credibility and access. People choose their mediators based on age, political and military power, reli-
gious affiliation, and knowledge of local history, social norms, and values. Therefore, local traditional
authority figures have advantages in managing conflict at the village and regional level rather than pol-
iticians who focus on gaining political power (Funk & Said, 2009, p. 174).
A comparison of traditions of the area that includes Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan, with practices of Afgha-
nistan, illustrates the variation in local practices. George Irani and Nathan Funk examine the process of
reconciliation after the commission of a crime and consider these practices as a pattern that should be
applied to larger conflicts. “Rituals such as sulh (settlement) and musalaha (reconciliation) exemplify
key Arab-Islamic cultural values, and should be looked at—both figuratively and to some extent liter-
ally—for insight into how to approach conflict resolution in the Middle East” (Irani & Funk, 2001, p.
171). This pattern emphasises the importance of restoring offenders to relations with the community and
building up the honour and reputation of the victims. They note that, “In Islamic law, sulh is a form of
contract (‘akd), legally binding on both the individual and community levels” (p. 33). Therefore, the pro-
cess involves the larger community, and people give great attention to symbolic actions.
For example, after a man commits a crime, he knows that victims will seek retribution against him and
his family. If the offender wants to prevent his own death, or the death of a brother, son, or father, he
must call on a delegation of mediators—comprised of village elders and notables, usually called mus-
lihs or jaha (those who have gained the esteem of the community)—to request a truce and negotiate the
payment of some recompense for his offence (Irani, 1999). The jaha play a crucial role in facilitating
“acknowledgement, apology, compensation, forgiveness and reconciliation” (Irani & Funk, 2001, p.
19). After the period of mourning and the presentation of the diya or blood money, having reached
an agreement, the families gather for the ritual shaking of hands. The offender and his family must
visit the family of the victim and drink the bitter coffee that they serve. Then, “The family of the offen-
der serves a meal to the family of the victim. This breaking of bread together, referred to as mumalaha,
completes the ritual of reconciliation” (Irani & Funk, 2001, p. 187).
The presentation of the blood money carries much greater symbolic weight that the actual amount of
money (Funk & Said, 2009, p. 59). In some cases, the family of the victim refuses the money, to signify
their nobility in forgiving without it (Funk & Said, 2009, p. 151). Qamar-ul Huda emphasises the
importance of sincerity, and a continuing effort to heal the breach in relations created by crime:
These open public rituals give great significance to symbolic actions. Similar priorities and issues play
out in cases of conflictmediation in a Tajik-speaking area of northern Afghanistan. The United States has
been forced to pay attention to local level disputes because anger at government corruption leads to con-
flict that undermines security. Gang (2012) reports that villagers actively shop for the forum in which
they believe they will gain the best justice at the lowest cost, with the greatest security that a resolved
problem will not spring up again in the future (p. 32). At the village level, people resolve disputes in the
jalasa, or “community meeting,” which can be arranged specifically for a particular dispute. Commonly
the elders, men with white beards, would meet after Friday noon prayers at the mosque (p. 18). She notes
that the ideal outcomes in small disputes are rooted in principles of islah,
Throughout Afghanistan and Pakistan where the Pashtuns live, they have a strong reputation for
employing collective dispute resolution. In addition to their devotion to Islam, Pashtuns follow an hon-
our code that governs social relations and behaviour called the Pashtunwali. This honour code some-
times leads to conflict with Sharia and sometimes conflicts with the official laws of the government of
Afghanistan. The honour code gives a balanced importance to competing values such as the necessity
of revenge (badal) to preserve honour and the obligation to forgive (nanawati) when your enemy begs
for forgiveness. Nevertheless, it holds great power as the legitimate guide to behaviour for Pashtuns.
Ali Wardak notes that over the centuries of living next to each other, the different ethnic and tribal
groups have emulated each other’s behaviour. He observes that, due to the presence and experience
of Pashtuns in conflict situations, “it was not uncommon for non-Pashtun groups to request local Pash-
tun elders hold a jirga to settle a non-Pashtun conflict” (Wardak, 2003, p. 5). He describes the oper-
ation of collective conflict management at several levels of social hierarchy.
At the local village level, Pashtuns use the term maraka for the gathering of older, respected elders and
other authorities called marakachian. These include the mashran (elders). speengiri (people with grey
beards), and speenpatkian (people with white turbans, which means mullahs; Wardak, 2003, p. 8). These
mediators employ different rituals of reconciliation or mediation in minor cases versus criminal cases.
Wardak describes the gathering as two circles, an inner circle of mediators and an outer circle in which
all the people of the village observe what is going on. This creates a broad spectrum of communication
that reinforces the social cohesion of the village as a community with a shared morality. “It also ensures
that the violator must pay the price for his/her violation, so that the actual harm inflicted (on the victim)
and the symbolic damage caused tothe moral order of the village are compensated” (Wardak,2003,p. 9).
In Wardak’s description, the mediators employ heavy persuasion to get all of the parties to agree to the
decision. Wardak puts the weight of success or failure of a maraka on the character of the men sitting
in the circle deciding and administering justice. “It is mainly the ‘traditional authority’ (based on per-
sonal qualities, social status, and leadership skills) of the marakachian, which plays a central part in
achieving a prikra [binding decision] that is satisfactory to both parties” (Wardak, 2003, p. 9). In his
description, a jirga works like a maraka, but at this higher, tribal level, the inner circle consists of more
prominent representatives of important families, men with a reputation for hospitality, bravery in bat-
tle, honour, verbal eloquence, sound judgement, and political influence with the government (p. 10).
The jirga can meet for several days at a time, until a decision is reached by consensus. If the jirga
breaks down, “the tribal leaders reassert their authority and the jirga is reconvened” (p. 11).
Sometimes the jirga decides that the family of the offender must send a nanawati delegation to the vic-
tim’s house to seek forgiveness and pardon. “This consists of a group of people that include speengiri,
torsary (female relatives of the offender holding a Qur’an), and speenpatkian, alongside the offender’s
close relatives (and sometimes the offender himself) who brings a sheep and flour to the victim’s house.
people to peace. In the context dominated by the military power of competing warlords, “Somaliland is
in fact a remarkable example of the supremacy of civil power” (p. 235). In the words of Ibrahim and
Terlinden (2010), Somaliland represents “home grown” peacemaking. “Somaliland achieved its ces-
sation of hostilities and also longer-term stability through a series of no less than thirty-eight clan-
based peace and reconciliation conferences and meetings between 1990 and 1997.” Ibrahim and
Terlinden credit success to the fact that the local communities paid the expenses of the meetings, key
figures participated voluntarily, and they adopted resolutions by consensus.
A key assessment of this success notes the role of the Somali traditional code of conduct (called Xeer,
similar to the role of Pashtunwali) whichcombines both Islamic Shariaand customary law. Councils and
juries of elders guided the discussion in meetings, which included a broad cross section of society. Ali
et al. (2008) note that community leaders, intellectuals, poets, business people, politicians, military offi-
cers, religious men, and also women participated in the meetings, although “tradition did not permit their
direct participation in the decision-making process” (p. 86). Women supported the meeting in arranging
venues, preparing meals, even selling their jewellery to pay for expenses. Women connectedby marriage
to other clans served as trusted couriers of information between competing clans. Ali, Mohammed, and
Walls argue that the peace meetings emphasised the importance of forgetting grievances and starting
fresh, the local nature of the process, the crucial role of the elders, and the personal commitment to peace
by the prominent mediators (p. 89). In sum, Somaliland stands as a testament to the power of reconcilia-
tion using local initiative, traditional Islamic principles, and respect for the elders as men of peace.
Another important case that illustrates the traditions and principles of Islamic peacebuilding in larger
conflicts can be found in the resolution of the Tajik Civil War. In this peace process, a form of “Track
2” diplomacy played a crucial role in enabling the government and the diverse opposition coalition to
reach a settlement. In this civil war, an entrenched, oppressive government of former Communist Party
officials faced four different opposition groups. The Pamiris predominantly wanted freedom to be left
alone, as expressed in secessionist demands for the mountainous Badakhshan region. As Ismaili Mus-
lims, the Pamiris had faced discrimination—many lived in severe poverty—but the Pamiri people also
had many high-levelintellectuals. Another segment of society phrased their demandsprimarilyin terms
of democracy, but many of their leaders fled to Moscow when active fighting started. A third group
expressed their demands primarily in terms of Tajik national identity as Persian speakers.Many of their
leaders went to Iran in the face of deteriorating security. Finally, a fourth group demanded freedom of
religion, andmanyoftheir leaders escaped to the mountains, or toAfghanistan.This created a challenge
in terms of getting the opposition to define a negotiating platform and select representatives for the
negotiations.
Although the government had rebranded itself in populist and nationalist terms, it lacked legitimacy in
the eyes of the people, who had suffered pressure and discrimination for their faith under Communist
rule. In the course of the conflict, conservative estimates say that 60,000 people died and 600,000 peo-
ple fled their homes. Although many people escaped to other parts of Tajikistan, large numbers went to
Afghanistan, Iran, Russia, and other parts of Central Asia. The heartache, grief, and losses created
great barriers to mediating this conflict.
The United Nations and a group of interested states worked hard to encourage the government and the
opposition to negotiate a political power-sharing agreement. However, even before the start of the
Tajik Civil War, Russian and American sponsors began the Tajik Dialogue process by seeking Tajiks
willing to meet together, several times a year, for up to 2 weeks at a time, to discuss rising tensions and
conflict in the country (Saunders, 1999, p. 155). Many of those selected for participation genuinely
sought peace with humility, out of love for their neighbours. Those who participated noticed that their
thinking, and even values, began to change as a result of their interaction. Many went on to establish
NGOs that operated on the principle of active dialogue.
Funk and Aziz (2009) offer a stirring advocacy of sustained dialogue as a means by which people can
process and overcome the powerful emotions createdin war: “Only active engagementthrough sustained
dialogue can help us transcend the fear, anger, and insecurity that foster conflict escalation and discover
the common humanity that these emotions conceal” (p. 43). The informal peace process in Tajikistan
sought to achieve these very goals. Furthermore, members of the sustained dialogue process repeatedly
provided crucial information and suggestions to the members of the formal negotiating teams.
International organisations and foreign states prefer to sponsor formal political negotiations, and they
only invite men supported by an armed force in the field. The agreements that they reach deal mostly
with issues of power-sharing from a rational-instrumental perspective. The agreements tend to lack
enforceable provisions for accountability to the public, political pluralism, support for minorities, and
protections of rights and procedures for peaceful change. The content of the General Agreement of
Peace and Reconciliation in Tajikistan, signed by the contending parties as a result of the formal
UN-mediated negotiations, strengthened institutional support for centralised state control, excluded
competing political parties, and reduced pluralism and participation. In contrast, a sustained dialogue
process seeks the maximum involvement and participation of society at the local level.
Harold H. Saunders, one of the organisers of the dialogue, advocated a “public peace process” that
emphasized the agency or activity of citizens, ideally interacting on many levels, outside of government,
separate from formal mediation or negotiations by governments (p. 78). Mullojanov (2001) notes that
whilst the formal agreement resulted from the negotiations amongst official decision-makers, there was
also an “Agreement on Social Accord in Tajikistan,” signed on March 9, 1996, by 66 political parties and
organizations, which established “The Public Council of the Republic of Tajikistan.”
Given the weaknesses and limitations of the formal General Agreement, the credit for any peace in
Tajikistan must go to the large, resilient civil society developed by those who participated in the Sus-
tained Dialogue programme. Mullojanov (2001) claims that “Civic groups have also shouldered the
responsibility of implementing conflict resolution, dialogue and education programmes. Their initia-
tives are gradually changing the political, social and even psychological atmosphere in the country.” In
summarising the contributions and observations of Abdullo Rashid, Mullojanov, and others who
recorded the consequences of the Sustained Dialogue, Abdullaev and Barnes (2001) conclude, “Thus
the Dialogue provided a unique bridge between the official process and civil society and complemen-
ted the more overtly political approaches to ending the war.” Public associations worked to reduce ten-
sions and hardships. Activists sought to improve conditions for people struggling with a difficult
institutional environment through extensive development of roundtables and dialogues for peacebuild-
ing, just like the jalosas of Northern Afghanistan, the jirgas of Pashtun areas, and the shuras of clan
elders in Somaliland. Some of the people that have most actively contributed to peacebuilding were not
dialogue participants, but from only limited contact with participants found the confirmation of their
own ideas, and the support and impetus to embark on their own programmes.
For example, Abdughani Mamadnazarov, the director of the Association of Young Political Scientists,
reinforced peace by providing opportunities for many people to participate in solving problems associ-
ated with politics and society. He promoted organizations that provide conditions for discussion. As of
June 2001, the association had organised scores of public roundtable discussions and more than 30 con-
tinuing political discussion clubs. These efforts included the participation of all districts or regions—
sometimes as many as five at a time and often more than three. Symbolism plays a big role in this work.
Mamadazimov repeatedly organised caravans to gather roundtable participants from all parts of the
republic. In one programme, he asked participants from every region to bring some of the local potter’s
clay. When the whole group had gathered, the organisers mixedall the samples of different clay collected
from each region of Tajikistan and moulded it into a ceramic vase, to symbolise the unity of Tajikistan.
In sum, in Tajikistan, the supportive social and cultural environment for peacebuilding developed
largely through local initiatives, with a spark from the Sustained Dialogue (Lederach, 1997). Because
of the Sustained Dialogue process, conflict resolution in Tajikistan ultimately represented the struggle
of traditional Islamic and national values. This reflects the arguments of Funk and Said (2009) regard-
ing seeking peace through local, traditional culture: “Islamic approaches to conflict resolution draw on
religious values, social networks, rituals of reconciliation, and historical practices of communal and
inter-communal coexistence” (p. 173). Therefore, they conclude: “The starting point for any intercul-
tural peacebuilding effort is the development of religious and cultural literacy” (p. 269). In other
words, efforts to support development and building peace in a traditional Muslim society can benefit
from learning about the local culture and the principles of conflict management in Islam.
Conclusion
The popular consciousness of Western audiences has little awareness of the activity of those who work
for peace in a traditional Islamic society. Negative media portrayals of Muslims create barriers to
understanding and appreciating the value of the Islamic heritage. If aid and development workers, peo-
ple working on PRTs, or those who promote health care and assist refugees, hold negative conceptions
whilst working with Muslims, they not only miss all of the benefits of effectively solving problems
with local traditional practices, but more seriously they face the grave danger of committing offenses
and stimulating resistance to their work. On the other hand, understanding that Islam offers significant
resources for Muslims to use in building peace awakens the understanding to fresh possibilities in sol-
ving problems, reducing conflicts, improving communication, and promoting human development.
Muslim conflict mediators use Islamic values,
combined with local examples and traditions, to
solve problems and preserve peace in a variety
of ways, distinctive to each society. Conflict med-
iators accept great personal vulnerability as they
work with men of violence. It also highlights the
importance of sustained dialogue as a tool for
social stability and, when conflicts do erupt, as a strategy for supporting formal negotiations.
