Title:
The Case for Moderate Gun Control
Abstract:
ABSTRACT. In addressing the shape of appropriate gun policy, this essay as-
sumes for the sake of discussion that there is a legal and moral right to private 
gun ownership. My thesis is that, against the background of this right, the most 
defensible policy approach in the United States would feature moderate gun 
control. The first section summarizes the American gun control status quo and 
characterizes what I call “moderate gun control.” The next section states and 
rebuts six leading arguments against this general approach to gun policy. The sec-
tion that follows presents a positive case for moderate gun control that emphasizes 
safety in the home and society as well as rights whose enforcement entails some 
limits or qualifications on the right to bear arms. A final section shows how the 
recommended gun regulations address legitimate purposes, rather than imposing 
arbitrary restrictions on gun rights, and offers concluding reflections.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 The Consequentialist Argument
 The Rights-based Argument


Text:
----------------------
2012 was yet another bad year for gun violence in the United States. 
There were over a dozen mass shooting incidents with two standing 
out as especially tragic. On July 20, James Holmes entered an Au-
rora, Colorado, premiere of a Batman movie and, using an AR-15 assault 
rifle supported by a 100-round ammunition clip, killed twelve people while 
wounding 58 more before his gun jammed. On December 14, Adam Lanza 
worked a Bushmaster assault rifle in killing his mother, twenty elementary 
schoolchildren, six staff members, and himself in Newtown, Connecticut. 
The latter rampage, especially the slaughter of young children at school, 
prompted a national discussion of gun violence not seen in the US since 
the attempted assassination of President Reagan. Whether any new gun 
control measures will become federal law is uncertain, however; the US 
Senate recently failed to muster enough support to bring a bill mandating 
universal background checks to a vote.
What is the shape of appropriate gun control in this country? In ad-
dressing this question, the present essay will assume that there is a right,
both legal and moral, to private gun ownership. More precisely, competent, 
law-abiding adults in the United States have a right to own such ordinary 
weaponry as handguns and long guns (shotguns and hunting rifles). Ac-
cording to the US Supreme Court—whose judgment this essay accepts 
for the sake of discussion—a legal right to bear arms is grounded in the 
Second Amendment of the Constitution.1,2 A moral right to private gun 
ownership, meanwhile, is most plausibly thought to be supported by a 
more general right to self-defense, which itself may be understood to derive 
from a basic right to physical security.3 Arguably, the prerogative to own 
hunting rifles rests on one or more liberty rights. Although I believe that 
the case for a moral right to bear arms is quite debatable, in this article I 
simply grant its existence alongside the legal right.4 I do so because most 
Americans believe in gun rights (CNN/Opinion Research Corporation 
2008, 2009; Pew Research Center 2010; ABC News/Washington Post 
2011), because the legal right has been asserted by the Supreme Court, 
and because it is important to consider what sorts of gun control are 
justifiable against this background of established law and broad public 
conviction. This background is unlikely to change anytime soon, and we 
need to determine how to proceed in addressing gun violence in America.
My thesis is that, assuming there is a right to bear arms, the most de-
fensible policy approach in the United States would feature moderate gun 
control.5 The discussion proceeds as follows. The first section summarizes 
the American gun control status quo and identifies several measures I will 
have in mind in defending what I call “moderate gun control.” The next 
section states and rebuts five leading arguments against gun control. The 
section that follows presents a positive case for gun control that empha-
sizes safety in the home and society as well as rights whose enforcement 
entails some limits or qualifications on the right to bear arms. A final 
section shows how the recommended gun regulations address legitimate 
purposes, rather than imposing arbitrary restrictions on gun rights, and 
offers concluding reflections.
Currently, federal gun regulations in this country are extremely minimal. 
Adults who lack any specific disqualifying criminal or psychiatric history 
can easily purchase firearms. The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention 
Act6 mandates background checks of gun buyers, but only if the seller is 
a licensed dealer; private sales, including those at gun shows and those 
conducted online, are exempt. Remarkably, records of background checks
cannot be preserved because the Firearm Owners Protection Act7 prohib-
its the creation of a national registry of gun ownership. This legislation 
also limited the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) from 
inspecting gun dealers more than once a year and raised the standard of 
proof needed to revoke their licenses. An amendment to a 2003 spend-
ing bill prohibits law enforcement from publicly releasing data showing 
where criminals purchased their firearms. As for the carrying of guns in 
public, the only federal legislation is the Gun-Free School Zones Act8. 
Meanwhile, 49 states permit the carrying of firearms and over 30 permit 
carrying without a license. And since the expiration of the Federal As-
sault Weapons Ban9 in 2004, guns that are legally available to the public 
include not only long guns and handguns but assault weapons as well;10 
also available, in addition to ordinary ammunition, are high-capacity clips. 
It is worth recalling that the two deadliest rampages of 2012 featured as-
sault weapons and high-capacity ammunition.
I will defend considerably more gun control than currently exists. The 
term “gun control,” as I understand it, refers to laws and policies designed 
to restrict the manufacture, sale, purchase, possession, storage, transfer, 
or use of firearms and/or associated ammunition. For convenience, I 
will consider various gun control measures, defined in this way, along 
with related political measures. In particular, I will defend the following 
as additions to the minimal regulations that constitute the legal status 
quo: (1) universal background checks; (2) a ban on assault weapons and 
high-capacity magazine clips; (3) the requirement of a license for all new 
gun owners, contingent upon passing a rigorous safety course; (4) safe 
storage requirements and required safety features on all guns; (5) tracing 
mechanisms on all guns and a national database of gun sales and gun own-
ers; (6) “de-crippling” of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms 
(ATF); and (7) restoration of funding to the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) to study the relationships among gun ownership, 
specific gun regulations, and gun violence. Although it will clearly stretch 
the meaning of “gun control” to include (6) and (7) under the rubric of 
this term, for the purposes of this paper it will be convenient to do so.
I characterize these proposed regulations—considered together on top 
of existing regulations—as moderate gun control. What, then, would 
count as extensive gun control? The limiting case, of course, would be 
an outright ban on private gun ownership. Short of that, extensive gun 
control might include—in addition to measures collectively deemed “mod-
erate”—severe limits on the number of guns one may purchase and own
and/or a mandatory buy-back of previously purchased assault weapons. 
It might also include a requirement that prospective gun buyers demon-
strate a special need for owning a gun (e.g., inadequate police protection 
in one’s neighborhood, a dangerous security job).
Naturally, such terms as “moderate gun control” and “extensive gun 
control” have no settled, precise meaning. Here I am just explaining 
roughly what I will mean by these terms. Moreover, I do not intend to sug-
gest that my arguments support precisely and only the measures I defend; 
someone who accepts my arguments might propose a different—indeed, 
a better—specification of the sorts of gun regulations that are justified 
along the lines I intend. Later I will say more about what the measures I 
defend have in common in terms of promoting safety and accountability 
while respecting gun rights. This should help to establish these measures 
as reasonable suggestions within the spirit of moderate gun control. 
Why defend moderate rather than extensive gun control? Given the 
background assumption of a right to gun ownership, extensive gun con-
trol is considerably harder to defend. At the same time, I do not preclude 
extensive gun control as the best approach.11 What this paper defends is 
(at least) moderate gun control.
Arguments against gun control are sometimes unclear regarding the ex-
tent of regulation they oppose. It will be helpful, therefore, to reconstruct 
existing arguments—the leading arguments against gun control of which I 
am aware—such that they oppose moderate gun control as I have charac-
terized it. I will state each argument in italics before advancing a rebuttal.
1. Moderate gun control violates the Second Amendment of the American 
Constitution: “A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of 
a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be 
infringed.” This statement establishes the right of private citizens to own 
firearms, notwithstanding the distracting phrase about a militia. But the 
sorts of regulation under consideration violate this right.
This argument is unsound. As the Supreme Court clarified in its land-
mark Heller case,12 the right to bear arms does not preclude significant 
gun controls. In its 5-4 decision, the court’s majority deemphasized the 
reference to a militia—as the above argument does—and explicitly stated 
that a right to own guns is constitutionally protected for lawful activities
such as self-defense in the home. But the court also explicitly allowed for 
the constitutionality of significant gun regulations:
In this passage the court is explicit that the assertion of a right to bear 
arms does not imply the assertion of an absolute or unlimited right. In 
fact, the court suggests several limits on gun rights that would pass con-
stitutional muster. The last sentence, for example, clears legal space for a 
ban on assault weapons.
In thinking about gun rights, it is important to recognize that all rights 
are limited in scope and at least most rights are subject to overriding. Even 
gun enthusiasts do not claim that young children, the severely mentally ill, 
or persons convicted of violent felonies have the right to bear arms. Gun 
rights are limited, at a first approximation, to competent, law-abiding 
adults. Moreover, few gun advocates would favor the legalization of ma-
chine guns. Both of these limits—who is eligible to buy guns and what sorts 
of guns are available—are limits in the scope of the right to gun ownership. 
But rights can also be overridden by considerations of the public welfare 
or by competing rights. This point is easily seen when we consider another 
constitutional right: the right to free speech. As everyone accepts, while 
this broad right protects nearly all public speech, it has limits. To cite the 
classic example, one may not shout “Fire!” (falsely) in a crowded movie 
house. One’s right to free speech is here overridden, and thereby limited, 
by consideration of other movie-goers’ welfare.
While the present rebuttal helps to show that the Second Amendment 
is compatible with certain gun regulations, it does not show that every 
measure I include under “moderate gun control” is constitutional. But I 
see no good reason to doubt that the regulations I have in mind are con-
sistent with a right to gun ownership. They serve the interests of safety 
and accountability without substantially interfering with competent adults’ 
ability to purchase and own guns for legitimate purposes. The claim that
these regulations are consistent with the constitutional right will receive 
further support from the discussions in the last two sections of this paper.
2. Introducing moderate gun regulations would place us on a slippery 
slope leading to a government ban on private gun ownership. Such a ban 
would be unacceptable. Thus, any step that makes a ban inevitable—or 
even much more likely—is intolerable. Since moderate gun control mea-
sures would constitute such a step, they should be rejected.
In rebutting this argument, we can grant the assumption that banning 
guns would be unacceptable because we assume the existence of a right 
to gun ownership. The problem with the slippery slope argument is its 
claim that the introduction of moderate gun control measures would likely 
lead to a ban on guns. Why should anyone believe this? Many countries 
allow gun ownership with gun control far more restrictive than our own, 
and it is hardly the case that they are also marching inexorably toward 
gun bans. Indeed, some of these countries—such as Canada, Australia, 
and several in Western Europe—have policies that amount to what we 
have termed extensive gun control (see, e.g., Vernick, Hodge, and Webster 
2007). At least as important is the Supreme Court’s finding that there is 
a constitutional right to bear arms. In view of this decision by the highest 
court, it is completely implausible that there could be a gun ban in this 
country even if we enacted moderate gun control: such a ban would be 
considered straightforwardly unconstitutional. Although slippery-slope 
arguments against gun control are a favorite political tactic of the National 
Rifle Association (NRA), they simply are not credible.
Any readers who are nevertheless inclined to take slippery-slope argu-
ments seriously may be reassured by the explicit pairing, in the final section, 
of specific gun controls with particular purposes. The clear acceptability 
of those purposes enables us to be confident that they justify only certain 
types of gun control, not a ban, and that there is no reason to assume that 
the regulations’ true motivation is to move toward one.
3. The right to bear arms is a basic (or fundamental) moral right that 
would be violated by moderate gun control. As a basic moral right, it 
exists independently of the Constitution. Any legal regime that did not 
protect the right to bear arms would represent a failure, for all basic moral 
rights should be protected by law. The right’s status as basic implies that 
it may be subject only to minor restrictions such as limiting eligibility to 
competent, law-abiding adults. Such moderate restrictions as requiring a 
safety course constitute excessive interference with the exercise of this right.
This reasoning errs both in asserting that the right to gun ownership is 
a basic moral right and, more importantly, in asserting that this right is 
violated by moderate regulations. First, the moral right to gun ownership 
is not basic. The concept of a basic right has been analyzed in various ways 
(see, e.g., Gewirth 1978, Shue 1996, and Griffin 2008), so it is difficult to 
avoid begging some questions in advancing a definition. Nevertheless, we 
may understand basic moral rights as moral rights that (1) protect highly 
general interests that are vital to the prospects for living a decent life and 
(2) are not specifications or instances of more general rights. An example 
of a basic right, which will be important to our discussion, is the right to 
physical security. A derived right, by contrast, is a right that is derived—
conceptually, empirically, or both—from one or more basic rights. The 
right not to be assaulted can be derived from the right to physical security; 
the former is one aspect of the latter. The moral right to gun ownership is 
not basic because it is false that owning guns, in and of itself, is necessary 
for the prospect of a decent life. For one thing, many people who have 
decent lives do not have guns (or family members who do). In addition, 
whatever value guns have must primarily concern their function—what 
they can do (LaFollette 2000, 265–66). If guns didn’t protect anyone 
from assault and didn’t work for hunting, they wouldn’t have their pres-
ent value. This suggests that gun rights must be (1) derivative from more 
general rights and (2) contingent upon their serving certain purposes. In 
societies in which guns do not serve such purposes related to any basic 
rights, there is no moral right to gun ownership. But, once again, we have 
assumed that there is such a right in the US today.
Suppose we granted (incorrectly) that this assumed right is a basic 
moral right. It would not follow that it must be free of moderate limits or 
regulations. The right to freedom of movement—a plausible candidate for 
a basic moral right—does not permit me to walk onto private property or 
into another person’s body without her permission. These are significant 
limits on my right to free movement. Even basic rights may be subject to 
significant restrictions.
4. In the United States today, moderate gun control would threaten effec-
tive self-defense (cf. Wheeler 1997 and Huemer 2003).14 The moral right 
to gun ownership receives its strongest support from a broader right to 
self-defense. (Let us use the term “self-defense” broadly, if slightly inac-
curately, to refer to defense of oneself and others in the household.)15 Even 
the legal right may be understood this way; the Supreme Court interpreted
the Second Amendment as protecting a right to own guns in pursuit of 
lawful objectives such as self-defense in the home. But surely the right to 
self-defense includes a right to reasonably effective means of self-defense. 
In this country today, many people cannot effectively defend themselves 
without guns. Moderate gun control measures would substantially dimin-
ish people’s ability to deploy guns in self-defense and are, for this reason, 
unacceptable.
Much of this reasoning is cogent. The argument plausibly grounds the 
right to gun ownership in self-defense while insisting that what merits pro-
tection is the means of effective self-defense. But the argument stumbles in 
asserting that effective self-defense would (necessarily or even presumably) 
be undermined by moderate gun control. After all, child-proof locks—
one type of gun safety feature—can be quickly disabled if necessary to 
confront an intruder. And it is hardly realistic that one needs an assault 
rifle and high-capacity ammo to keep one’s family reasonably safe. Nor 
does having to take a rigorous safety course before becoming a gun-owner 
substantially interfere with one’s ability to defend oneself. Although this 
requirement would cause some delay in being able to own and use guns 
in self-defense, effective self-defense requires a skill set that a safety course 
makes one far more likely to possess. Also, to anticipate a point that will 
be developed in the following section, self-defense is not effective if one’s 
storage and use of guns are unsafe and constitute a major threat against 
the well-being of oneself and other individuals in the household.
5. Moderate gun control is unacceptable because it would violate our right 
to liberty. This violation would occur in several ways. First, by limiting 
the weapons one may use and the circumstances under which one may 
obtain them, moderate gun control would violate one’s liberty to defend 
oneself as one sees fit. Second, by imposing these limitations, moderate 
gun control would violate one’s liberty to recreate as one wants. Third, 
with the sorts of interferences just described, moderate gun control would 
violate one’s liberty to adopt a particular lifestyle.16
Although this argument may resonate with many NRA members, it 
is significantly wrong-headed and provides no good reason to oppose 
moderate gun control.
First, it is misleading at best to speak of a general “right to liberty”—to 
do as one pleases—which is violated or overridden in every instance in 
which one’s liberty is curtailed (Griffin 2008, chap. 9; Waldron 1993, chap. 
2). It is not as if people have a right to enter my home without permission,
but this right is overridden by my rights to property and physical security 
and laws prohibiting trespass. Rather, whatever our morally protected 
liberty includes, it does not include a prerogative to enter people’s homes 
without permission. Instead of asserting a general right to liberty, it is more 
perspicacious to assert specific liberty rights such as rights to freedom of 
worship and freedom of expression. After the inapt reference to a “right 
to liberty,” the present argument does refer to specific liberty rights, which 
we may consider in turn.
The argument asserts that gun control would violate a right to defend 
oneself as one sees fit. Is there such a right? There is a right to self-defense. 
And it makes sense that one should enjoy considerable discretion, in exer-
cising this right, as to how one might defend oneself. But, surely, legitimate 
discretion has limits. As the Supreme Court stated, the right to bear arms 
“is not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner 
whatsoever and for whatever purpose.” From any reasonable perspective, 
one may not defend oneself with a grenade launcher, bazooka, or nuclear 
weapon, because those weapons are excessively dangerous and unneces-
sary for the sorts of threats that homeowners may reasonably anticipate. 
As will become clear in the next section, guns are also very dangerous in 
the sense of posing significant risks not only to burglars and assailants, 
but also to gun owners and others in their household. For this reason, 
gun controls that are reasonably (but not excessively) responsive to these 
risks do not violate one’s right to self-defense or one’s moral prerogative 
to do so as one wishes, because the limits of that right and prerogative 
are appropriately set by reasonable considerations of safety. I will argue 
that moderate gun controls are justified in exactly this way.
Consider now the assertion that moderate gun control would violate 
one’s liberty right to recreate as one wants. Here the focus is on hunting, 
which many people value as a means of recreation. In this paper, I set 
aside the ethical issues associated with hunting and assume that Americans 
today have a right to own hunting rifles and to hunt with them. The first 
point to notice is that moderate gun control as envisioned in this paper 
will pose no significant obstacle to hunting. Having to take a safety course 
before buying one’s first gun, for example, is not a significant obstacle. 
Second, as with the alleged right to defend oneself as one sees fit, there 
is no unlimited right to recreate as one pleases. Obviously, one may not 
shoot children for sport or own and use machine guns in hunting deer. 
Is there, more plausibly, a right to recreate as one pleases so long as one 
doesn’t harm others (or other human beings)? Not, I think, if one’s pleasure
involves use of a weapon that it is excessively dangerous to allow private 
citizens to obtain. Thus, an Old Chicago Mob Reenactors Club may be 
prevented from buying machine guns.
The third asserted liberty—to adopt a particular lifestyle—is much 
broader than the first two. In fact, because the spirit of this appeal refers 
to a lifestyle in which one celebrates gun ownership, the liberty in ques-
tion really incorporates the two more specific liberties we have discussed. 
Accordingly, the liberty to adopt a particular lifestyle is similarly bounded 
by reasonable efforts to limit risks. Thus, this liberty right, properly un-
derstood, is compatible with moderate gun control.17
Having rebutted leading objections to moderate gun control, we turn 
now to a positive case for this approach to gun policy.
The Consequentialist Argument
The consequentialist component of the case for moderate gun control 
(which will be followed by a rights-based component) focuses on the 
dangerousness of guns. This focus, to be sure, could support an argument 
for extensive gun control, even a ban on firearms or some large category 
of firearms such as handguns. But, as discussed earlier, the present dis-
cussion takes the right to bear arms as a point of departure. Given that 
starting point, the case for (at least) moderate gun control will appeal 
to guns’ dangerousness and to the possibility of mitigating the relevant 
dangers in justifying particular gun control measures. After all, danger-
ousness comes in degrees. If a society has to accept certain things that are 
inherently dangerous—whether guns, automobiles, or tackle football—it 
makes sense to try to make them less dangerous within the constraints of 
respecting people’s rights.
The consequentialist argument begins with a thesis that addresses soci-
ety’s interest in household safety while turning the most powerful argument 
for gun ownership rights into an argument for gun control. The thesis 
is that, in the United States today (in which gun control is minimal), the 
presence of one or more guns in a house makes household members—on 
average—less safe than they would be in a gun-free household. Available 
evidence strongly supports the following more specific claims. First, having 
a gun at home makes household members more likely to die by suicide 
(Brent et al. 1991; Kellermann et al. 1992; Chapdelaine and Maurice 1996; 
Conwell, Connor, and Cox 2002; Miller, Azrael, and Hemenway 2002; 
Miller and Hemenway 2008). Second, the risk of death by homicide is
much greater in homes with guns than in gun-free homes (Kellermann et 
al. 1993; Wiebe 2003a). Third, domestic violence is much more likely to 
prove lethal if guns are present in the home (Saltzman et al. 1992; Camp-
bell et al. 2003). Fourth, the risk of accidental death increases markedly 
in households with guns (Miller and Hemenway 2001; Wiebe 2003b). 
Overall, having guns at home increases the risk of household members’ 
suffering a violent death. Another study—which is only partly relevant 
to our discussion because it considered assaults both in and outside the 
home—concluded that assault victims who possessed a gun were far more 
likely to be shot than assault victims who did not possess a gun (Branas 
et al. 2009).
Thus, available evidence strongly supports the thesis that owning guns 
for the purpose of self-defense—at least in the United States today (in 
which gun control is minimal)—tends to be self-defeating: household 
members, on average, face a greater chance of suffering a violent death 
if the house contains one or more guns than if the house is free of fire-
arms. The qualification “on average” should not be overlooked. For the 
thesis is not that gun ownership is necessarily self-defeating for every 
individual who owns guns; gun ownership might, on balance, be neutral 
or even safety-enhancing for some individuals and households depending 
on their circumstances, their knowledge of gun safety, particular features 
(e.g., safety features) of the guns they own, and other details. As things 
stand, however, gun ownership in the United States today tends to be 
self-defeating from a safety standpoint.
Proponents of a right to commit suicide might respond that we should 
ignore the many cases in which guns kept at home are used for this pur-
pose. After all, we do not normally think of self-defense as being necessary 
against oneself. But this response to the present argument does not cast 
significant doubt upon it, for several reasons.
First, even if we acknowledge a right to commit suicide, from any 
reasonable perspective the vast majority of suicides must be regarded as 
tragic. It is not very often that we carefully reflect upon the circumstances 
of someone who committed a suicide and think, “Yes, suicide was the 
very best option for that individual.” Sometimes we may, but not very 
often—especially when the victim of suicide is a child, a mentally ill person, 
or someone who acts impulsively. Often those who commit suicide are 
unaware of, or are momentarily unable to appreciate, the prospects for 
their lives going better. In a very real sense, then, many people who feel a 
desire to commit suicide do need protection against themselves.
Relatedly, if there is a right to commit suicide, it is plausibly limited 
to suicidal choices that are genuinely autonomous—choices, that is, that 
are carried out voluntarily (not primarily driven by external pressures or 
internal compulsions) with an adequate understanding of one’s realistic 
options (including those involving available forms of help), and with the 
psychological capacity to appreciate those options (as opposed to devaluing 
them due to the distorting effects of depression). An autonomous choice 
will accord with one’s values and stable preferences. Some suicides commit-
ted with the help of a physician meet these criteria; no doubt some suicides 
committed without such help do as well. But, of course, one doesn’t need 
a gun to commit suicide autonomously. And the presence of guns makes it 
more likely that one will kill oneself impulsively and non-autonomously. 
Thus, a right to commit suicide, plausibly construed, will not undermine 
the thesis that gun ownership for the purpose of self-defense is, on aver-
age, self-defeating.
While the first thesis in the consequentialist argument for moderate 
gun control concerns safety in the home, the second concerns safety in 
the broader society. The second thesis is that widespread availability of 
guns makes a society less safe—as indicated by the fact that gun owner-
ship rates within a population correlate significantly with murder rates 
in that population. This point has been amply demonstrated both within 
the United States and internationally.
As for domestic comparisons, a literature review found that in American 
cities, states, and regions (as well as across high-income nations), where 
there are more guns, people are at higher risk for homicide (Hepburn 
and Hemenway 2004). Another study, comparing state firearm levels and 
controlling for poverty, urbanization, and region, found that children and 
adults, men and women, and members of all racial groups are significantly 
more likely to die from unintentional gun deaths if they live in states with 
higher levels of gun ownership (Miller, Azrael, and Hemenway 2001). 
Focusing on children, a third study concluded that a disproportionately 
large number of five- to fourteen-year-olds died from homicides, uninten-
tional firearm deaths, and suicides in regions and states where guns were 
more prevalent (Miller, Azrael, and Hemenway 2002a). The basic picture 
of more guns in a part of the US correlate with more homicides has been 
confirmed in many studies (Miller, Azrael, and Hemenway 2002b, 2007; 
Violence Policy Center 2013).
A similar pattern emerges in international comparisons. Higher rates of 
gun ownership correlate significantly with higher rates of homicides and
suicides (Lester 1991; Killias 1993a, 1993b; CDC 1997; Hemenway and 
Miller 2000). It bears emphasis that we are talking about rates within a 
given population size, not total numbers, making comparisons between 
the United States and smaller countries more meaningful. A 2007 study, 
which estimated gun ownership rates among a large number of countries, 
found that the US leads the world with 89 guns per 100 people, with 
Yemen a distant second at 55 guns per 100 people (Geneva Graduate 
Institute of International Studies 2007). Meanwhile, the US gun homi-
cide rate is 30 times that of Australia or France, and twelve times as high 
as the average for other developed countries (United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime 2011). Moreover, a disproportionate number of victims 
are children. A major Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
study found that the firearm death rate among American children was 
almost twelve times higher than the average rates of 25 other developed 
countries (1997). The inescapable fact is that the US has enormously high 
rates of gun violence and gun ownership—and it is obvious that easy ac-
cess to guns has a great deal to do, causally, with the frequent occurrence 
of American gun tragedies.
One reporter who studied the international data appealed both to the 
data and to common sense:
It is true that “correlation does not entail causation.” It is logically pos-
sible that the correlations under consideration do not reflect a causal 
relationship between gun ownership rates and death rates. But to deny 
the causal relationship is enormously implausible. Other factors, such as 
incidence of mental illness and willingness to kill, cannot account for such 
huge differences in rates.
John Lott, a prominent opponent of gun control, dismisses international 
comparisons, stating that “it is difficult to obtain gun ownership data both 
over time and across countries, and to control for all the other differences 
across the legal systems and cultures across countries” (2010, 116). Lott
is right about the methodological challenges posed by international com-
parisons, but to disregard international data seems irresponsible (as well 
as convenient for one who opposes gun control). Moreover, if we dig a 
bit deeper into the data, the picture becomes clearer. For example, in a 
comparison of homicides of children from ages five to fourteen among 26 
wealthy nations, the US rate was 17 times the average of the other coun-
tries in homicides involving guns but only twice as high in homicides not 
involving guns (and six times as high overall); meanwhile, in the same age 
group, the US suicide rate was 10 times the average of the other countries 
where guns were used but approximately the same where guns were not 
used (and twice as high overall) (Hemenway and Miller 2000). These data 
cannot be satisfactorily explained without recognizing gun availability as 
a significant causal factor (LaFollette 2001, 36–37).
Other things being equal, the more guns are available for a popula-
tion of a given size, the more murders, suicides, and accidental killings 
there will be. This fact recommends moderate gun control in the interest 
of promoting public safety. There are two basic ways to understand this 
point. First, if we think of gun control (as opposed to a gun ban) as not 
affecting the quantity of guns in a society, we may reasonably judge that we 
should make these dangerous weapons less dangerous through appropri-
ate gun regulations. Alternatively, if we think of gun control as affecting 
the quantity of guns—for example, by restricting who can purchase guns 
and instituting universal background checks—we may reasonably judge 
that reducing gun ownership rates is a way of decreasing the harm likely 
to be caused by these weapons. Both of these judgments make good sense.
Thus, society’s interests in both household safety and public safety serve 
as the basis for a commonsensical, consequentialist argument in favor of 
moderate gun regulations that are designed to promote safety without 
violating, or unduly restricting, the right to bear arms.
The Rights-based Argument
Careful reflection on our moral rights strengthens the case for moderate 
gun control. This is very important because some gun advocates believe 
that duly accounting for gun rights defeats the case for gun control by 
trumping consequentialist arguments in its favor. Let’s see why they are 
mistaken.
People have a basic right to physical security. Although some of the 
details of what this right comes to—some of its implications—are contro-
versial, some of its implications are not particularly controversial. For ex-
ample, there are rights not to be assaulted, raped, murdered, and tortured. 
There is also, again, a right to self-defense, which permits one to try to 
prevent others from violating one’s rights not to be assaulted, etc. These 
rights all derive from a basic right to physical security. As we have seen, 
if there is a right to gun ownership—as we have assumed there is—this 
right is most plausibly thought to derive from the right to self-defense, 
which in turn is supported by one’s basic right to physical security. But 
this same basic right also supports moderate gun control.
The crucial point is that one’s rights not be assaulted, etc. need to be 
enforced if they are to be meaningfully honored.18 Enforcement, of course, 
has costs. For example, your right to walk around in public free of assault 
requires a reasonably effective police force and court system to punish 
violators and deter prospective violators. Maintaining a police force and 
a court system is costly, but the costs—which are imposed on taxpay-
ers—are justified as a price to pay for the meaningful protection of one’s 
rights not to be assaulted, etc. This, so far, is just common sense. After 
all, nonenforcement also has costs including a lot more assaults, rapes, 
and murders. These costs are unreasonably high, so they help to justify 
the costs of enforcement.
Now consider guns and household safety. Assume, as we have through-
out the essay, that competent adults have a right to own guns. This right 
encompasses many prerogatives or specific freedoms, such as the option to 
brandish a gun if an intruder intrudes, while presumably excluding some 
others, such as shooting up one’s guests without provocation. Consider 
now the specific freedom to leave a gun lying around the house unsecured. 
Suppose we propose that gun-owners have no right to do that; their gun 
rights do not encompass this prerogative but instead are limited by a 
requirement to store guns safely. This limit on gun-owners’ rights would 
entail a cost involving some inconvenience. But consider the costs of not 
imposing this limit: household members are more likely to be killed or 
seriously injured through accidental, reckless, or homicidal gunfire. The 
point is especially clear in the case of child victims. They have a right not 
to be seriously injured or killed by gunfire. The costs to children (and 
other potential shooting victims in the household) of not requiring safe 
storage of weapons are very high. The costs to gun-owners of having to 
store their weapons safely are small. Here the gun-owners’ interest in do-
ing as they please with their guns needs to be balanced against household 
members’ interest in not being shot. The balancing favors limiting the 
gun-owners’ rights: they should be required to store their weapons safely
as a reasonable measure to protect household members’ right not to be 
killed or seriously injured by gunfire.
The argument so far has discussed moderate gun control as part of 
what is necessary to protect people’s rights not to be assaulted, etc. In 
the case of children, another right comes into play: their right not to die 
or be seriously injured as a result of gross negligence. If parents leave an 
opened bottle of liquid bleach around so that it is easy for their young 
child to drink it, and the child does so, then she is a victim of her parents’ 
gross negligence. If a society allows people to keep unconstrained lions in 
their home and one such lion eats a couple’s child, the child is a victim of 
the society’s (and probably her parents’) gross negligence. Children have 
a right not to be seriously harmed as a result of gross negligence just as 
surely as they and adults have rights not to be assaulted, killed, raped, or 
tortured. These rights derive from a basic right of physical security, the 
same basic right that undergirds the right to self-defense and the more 
specific right of gun ownership.
Because the right to gun ownership, on the one hand, and rights not to 
be assaulted, etc., and children’s right not to be seriously harmed through 
gross negligence, on the other, are in tension, the appropriate boundaries 
of each must take the other rights into consideration. Given our assump-
tion that there is a right to gun ownership, it would be improper to ban 
guns in the name of enforcing the various rights that may be violated in 
the household due to improper gun use. By the same token, the latter 
rights would not be duly respected if we interpreted gun rights so capa-
ciously as to preclude gun control measures that are reasonably related 
to household safety.
So far we have been discussing the rights of household members as a 
basis for moderate gun control. Similar reasoning applies to members of 
society in general, whether they are at home or out in public. Everyone 
has rights not to be assaulted, etc., and therefore a right not to be shot. 
Responsible efforts to enforce this right include efforts aimed at public 
safety in the form of moderate gun regulations. 
It is paramount to appreciate that the rights-based argument is not a 
redundant overlay to the consequentialist argument for moderate gun 
control, even if both arguments are tightly connected with considerations 
of safety. After all, many rights theorists think of rights as (ordinarily) 
trumping appeals to the general welfare or consequentialist considerations 
and constraining attempts to promote the general welfare (Dworkin 
1977; Nozick 1974). Hughes and Hunt, for example, state that “from
a liberal point of view, the mere fact that a policy could save lives is not 
a sufficient reason for adopting it. [T]he pursuit of all social goals . . . is 
constrained [by individuals’ rights]” (2000, 2; see also Huemer 2003).19 
Rights are so important, from this perspective, that they should generally 
not be overridden even when a clear gain in overall utility is in prospect. 
My discussion of rights neutralizes the claim of some gun advocates that 
because we have rights to gun ownership, appeals to safety in the household 
and safety in society are irrelevant. It neutralizes this claim by showing 
that, in addition to gun rights, there are other rights that come into play. 
Proper enforcement of the latter rights, as we have seen, requires limits 
on the gun rights. These limits are characterized by moderate gun control. 
What remains is to show that the particular regulations I recommend are 
justified in a way that is responsive to the case for moderate gun control 
presented in this section.
Let us consider the measures enumerated earlier as characterizing 
moderate gun control. Each measure will be shown to be justified by be-
ing reasonably related to the goal of promoting safety—and, in parallel 
fashion, reasonably related to the enforcement of people’s rights not to be 
assaulted, etc., and children’s right not be seriously harmed as a result of 
gross negligence. This will not only complete the case for moderate gun 
control. It may also reassure readers who are especially fearful of govern-
ment intrusion, including those who worry about a slippery slope leading 
to a gun ban, by showing that each recommended regulation is consistent 
with the assertion of a right to bear arms rather than arbitrarily limiting 
gun owners’ liberty.
Universal background checks.20 The purpose of this measure is to ensure 
that people who ought to be ineligible to buy guns—including felons, fugi-
tives from justice, and the seriously mentally ill—cannot purchase them 
from friends, associates, or non-licensed dealers at gun shows or online. 
Successful exclusion of these individuals from gun purchases obviously 
promotes safety in exactly the same way that currently mandatory back-
ground checks (for sales by licensed dealers) do. Like most of the other 
measures proposed here, this one would be prospective—applying only 
to transactions that take place after passage of the relevant law. There 
would be no practical way of trying to enforce background checks on 
sales made prior to that time.
Ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazine clips. These weap-
ons and this ammunition are extremely dangerous and unnecessary for the 
legitimate purposes of household defense and hunting. They have enabled 
some of the worst rampages in recent American history. The purpose of 
the ban is to reduce the chances of massacres such as those that took 
place at Columbine High School, the Aurora, Colorado, movie theatre, 
and the Newtown, Connecticut, elementary school. This ban, too, should 
be prospective—although it could be coupled with a voluntary buy-back 
program of assault weapons and high-capacity clips in circulation. Because 
such a buy-back program would be voluntary, it could not be accused of 
restricting anyone’s liberty, much less of violating anyone’s rights.
Requirement of a license for all new gun owners, contingent upon 
passing a rigorous safety course. The United States has long required 
prospective drivers to obtain a license before being permitted to drive an 
automobile. Obtaining the license is contingent upon passing a driving 
test and a written test, after considerable hours of practice, where the tests 
are designed to assess basic competence. Although prospective drivers are 
inconvenienced by these requirements, everyone is safer because of them. 
In a similar way, everyone would be safer if prospective gun owners had 
to take a course and pass a test designed to assess basic competence with 
the storage and use of firearms.21 The right to bear arms is not a right to do 
so without restrictions, and this particular restriction is reasonably related 
to household and public safety. This measure, too, would be prospective, 
applying only to those who purchase guns after the new law was in effect. 
As far as I can see, there would be no reason not to apply the requirement 
to individuals who had obtained guns prior to the law’s passage but wish to 
purchase more guns after that time. The purpose of the regulation would 
be to reduce the chances of accidental killings and injuries.
Safe storage requirements and required safety features (e.g., child-proof 
locks) on all guns. The purpose of these closely related requirements, 
which can remain vague for the purposes of this paper, is to reduce the 
chances that a child will be able to commandeer and fire a gun. The stor-
age requirements would be both prospective and retrospective in that 
they would apply to all guns no matter when they were purchased. The 
required safety features would apply only to guns manufactured after a 
legally determined date.
Effective tracing mechanisms on all guns and a national database of gun 
sales and gun owners. The purpose of these measures is to facilitate law 
enforcement and thereby public safety. This includes the fighting of illegal
traffic in firearms and the prosecution of those who fail to conduct, or 
ignore the results of, background checks. Tracing mechanisms—preferably 
less easily expunged than ordinary serial numbers—would be required of 
all guns manufactured in the United States after a specified date; after a 
possibly later date, all guns bought or sold in the US (even if manufactured 
in another country) would have to have this feature. All new gun owners, 
following passage of the relevant law, must be registered in a national 
database, a measure that should be relatively easy to implement given the 
universal licensing requirement.
“Decrippling” of ATF. The NRA-sponsored budgetary and leadership 
crippling of the ATF (Horwitz and Grimaldi 2010; Higham et al. 2012; 
O’Keefe and Rucker 2013) should be reversed so that the bureau can 
have adequate staff and resources to do its job.22 The ATF should be freed 
of NRA-sponsored restrictions that have interfered unreasonably with 
law enforcement. For example, the law that prevents information about 
guns found at crime scenes from being made publicly available should be 
reversed. If, for example, drug lords or Mafiosi have been illegally obtain-
ing and using guns obtained from a particular dealer in Ohio or Texas, 
it should be possible for both ATF officials and the public to learn about 
the pattern. ATF inspectors should not be restricted to one visit to gun 
dealers per year and should not bear an unreasonable burden of proof to 
revoke licenses. The purpose of these changes would be to strengthen law 
enforcement and thereby promote public safety.
Restoration of funding to the CDC to study the relationships among 
gun ownership, specific gun regulations, and gun violence. Consider this 
remarkably direct statement about the NRA’s impact on the CDC through 
a co-opted Congressman:
The purpose of the present measure would be to enhance public un-
derstanding of gun ownership, its risks, the effects of particular gun 
regulations, and the advantages of taking safety requirements and other 
appropriate regulations seriously.
This completes a brief sketch of specific measures that I recommend 
in the name of moderate gun control. Obviously, and to understate the 
point, to enact the full extent of these measures would be uncharacteristic 
of our governmental leadership and political culture. But, when it comes 
to guns, this leadership and this culture have long been dominated by 
the NRA and the interests of gun manufacturers (Horwitz and Grimaldi 
2010; Higham et al. 2012; Luo 2013; McIntyre and Luo 2013). The gun 
lobby has its handprints on many of our extreme and bizarre gun laws, 
such as those that make it easy for criminals to buy guns—indeed, assault 
weapons—and those that interfere with law enforcement while eviscerat-
ing accountability for gun dealers and manufacturers. As one gun scholar 
put it, “The NRA often has this line, ‘Why don’t we enforce the laws on 
the books?’ but for the last few decades they’ve been making it harder 
and harder for federal agencies to do that.”23 In addition, the NRA helped 
to manufacture a legal literature that was cited by the bare majority of 
Supreme Court justices who—quite debatably—minimized the reference 
to militias in the Second Amendment and declared a constitutional right 
to gun ownership (Finn 2013). In this essay I have simply assumed the 
existence of both a legal and moral right to gun ownership, taking this 
right as a fixed point for the foreseeable future. Given this fixed point, our 
question has been how we ought to proceed in view of the current state 
of American gun violence.
This essay has underscored the compatibility of gun rights and moderate 
gun control. It is the author’s hope that the present discussion will be part 
of a growing body of ethics literature that helps to correct the intellectual 
distortions, suppression of information, and legislative failures that have 
been promoted by the gun lobby and accepted by government officials who 
fear its leadership. We owe it to ourselves, and especially our children, to 
do all we reasonably can to stem gun violence and achieve safety in our 
homes and schools and on the streets. We owe it to the memory of twenty 
schoolchildren who were recently slaughtered by a disturbed young man 
who was able to commandeer an assault rifle and high-capacity ammuni-
tion owned by his mother. The time has arrived for moderate gun control 
in the United States.
I would like to thank Hugh LaFollette and members of the National 
Institutes of Health Department of Bioethics, especially Joe Millum, for 
helpful feedback on a draft of this paper. I am also grateful to two external 
reviewers, especially one who provided detailed and perceptive criticisms.
