Title:
A Geography of Human Rights Abuses
Abstract:
What can geography as a discipline contribute towards a better understand-
ing of human rights issues? Based on an analysis of three maps, selected from 
a larger set of thirty-two generated from data abstracted from 720 Amnesty 
International Freedom Writers Letters, this study finds that the number and 
frequency of human rights abuses over the past twenty years has remained 
stable at best. A set of ten confounding factors are indentified to explain 
this lack of progress towards improving worldwide human rights. This article 
concludes that geographers and human rights scholars could profit in their 
work by collaborating and consulting with one another’s research.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 A Geography of Human Rights Abuses
 Roger Mark Selya*
 AbSTRAcT
 I. INTRodUcTIoN
 II. AN ANoMALY
 IV. dATA SoURcES
 V. dEScRIpTIoN ANd ANALYSIS of THE MApS
 VI. TYpES of AbUSES
 VII. WHAT WENT WRoNG?
 Ix. coNcLUSIoN


Text:
----------------------
A Geography of Human Rights Abuses
Roger Mark Selya*
AbSTRAcT
I. INTRodUcTIoN
Although geography as a discipline is not commonly associated with de-
scribing and explaining human rights abuses or providing policy remedies 
for such abuses, it would seem that many feel it definitely should be. Rex 
Honey, for example, has issued an explicit call for political geographers to 
lend their expertise to the study of human rights.1 He stresses three points in 
his plea for geographers to engage in such research. First, geography explores 
the context in which human rights struggles occur and brings to the study of 
human rights two kinds of knowledge: knowledge of cultures and knowledge 
of the nature-society nexus. As such, omitting the geographical background
and consequences of human rights issues is likely to be incomplete because 
it fails to capture both the cultural struggles over what a just society is and 
the milieu of interrelated sites of injustice. Conversely, according to Honey, 
in order for geography as a discipline to fulfill its potential as a scholarly 
endeavor examining the human condition, human rights must be part of its 
research focus. 
At present, Honey notes that there are two traditions in the geographic 
approach to human rights. An older, implicit approach has focused on hu-
man rights problems such as racism, slavery, social justice, poverty, and 
electoral violations without specific reference to any extant human rights 
doctrines or agreements. In their presidential addresses, for example, many 
past presidents of the Association of American Geographers, such as Richard 
Hartshorne, Richard Morrill, Harold Rose, Gilbert White, and Julian Wolpert, 
have called for the eradication of these wrongs. In contrast, the second, more 
contemporary tradition has actively and formally advocated for democracy 
and pushed for civil and political liberties based on both the French and 
United States Revolutions. In some cases, scholars have lobbied or advocated 
for a communal rights agenda emphasizing social and economic benefits: 
wages, jobs, education, and health care.
II. AN ANoMALY
The proliferation of reports, country studies, and documentaries issued dur-
ing the past two decades by a growing variety of national and international 
governments and human rights organizations would suggest that there should 
be sufficient data to prepare a variety of geographic analyses of the global 
human rights situation. Oddly enough, only one article by a geographer 
has ever appeared in the Human Rights Quarterly.2 This anomaly pervades 
the main professional organization of geographers, the American Associa-
tion of Geographers (AAG), which sponsors a cooperative program with 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). Its goal 
is to expand an array of projects and programs to engage geographers as 
scientists in human rights issues. As of January 2009 the two organizations 
anticipated creating a new Science and Human Rights Coalition, establish-
ing an AAG clearinghouse on geographic research and human rights in 
cooperation with an AAAS project on geospatial technologies and human 
rights.3 Annual meetings of the AAG now feature special sessions on hu-
man rights. One such session at the 2009 meetings was a workshop entitled 
“Human Rights 101 for Geographers.”4 It is apparent that the professional 
commitment and infrastructure for geographers to contribute to the study of 
human rights is now in place.
The above discussion notwithstanding, geographers have in fact pub-
lished a considerable body of literature on the subject of human rights, but 
the vast amount of it has appeared in geographic journals. For example, in 
the Political Geography Quarterly, some 132 articles with human rights as 
a focus were published between 1982 and 1991; in Political Geography, 
between January 1992 and June 2011, some 712 articles with human rights 
as a focus were published; geographers also published some 833 human 
rights related articles in Antipod: A Radical Journal of Geography, over the 
period January 1997 through June 2011. These materials demonstrate that 
geographers have made meaningful, albeit unrecognized, contributions to 
understanding the relationships between human rights abuses and borders, 
development,5 environmental, ethnic, land and resource conflicts, and social 
justice.6 Furthermore, the use of GIS and Remote Sensing has permitted the 
documentation of where abuses have occurred even when it is difficult for 
observers to directly visit suspect locations.7
Why then are insights of geographers not part of the human rights 
discourse? Several reasons are immediately apparent. First, to satisfy the 
demands of department heads, tenure committees, and deans, geographers 
interested in human rights publish almost exclusively in geography journals,
especially those that focus on political geography. Moreover, regardless of 
where geographers publish, they rarely refer to the broader human rights 
literature. If they do reference non-geographic materials, they are most likely 
to draw from contemporary materials in political science or international 
relations. Finally, in many geographic papers dealing with human rights, the 
human rights component frequently gets lost. So for example, Nurit Kliot’s 
article on refugees and human rights provides considerable detail regarding 
their number and places of origin as well as their places of refuge. But the 
human rights aspect of the plight of the refugees is only implied.8 
The present study seeks to provide an example of a geographic analysis 
of a human rights issue using a multidisciplinary approach. By fulfilling this 
goal it is hoped that on the one hand those in the field of human rights 
research will consider looking to geography for insights and new paths of 
research, and on the other hand that geographers will explicitly include the 
human rights literature in their work.
The question I wish to explore is whether or not there has been a change 
in the prevalence of the spatial patterns of human rights abuses over the 
period 1986–2006. There are ample reasons to speculate that such changes 
might or should have occurred. The end of the Cold War, the fall of the So-
viet Union, the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, the spread of globalization and 
economic development, and the end of the “dirty wars” in Latin America 
have all had the potential for enhancing respect for human rights and re-
ducing human rights abuses. So my working hypothesis will be that related 
sets of economic and political changes have in fact led to improvements in 
human rights, and that such improvements can be seen in an examination 
of maps showing human rights abuses over time. Possible changes in the 
spatial distribution of human rights abuses are dealt with as follows: first, 
the data set used will be presented; then, maps of the number, percent, and 
prevalence of human rights abuses will be described and analyzed. Finally, 
materials that can provide an explanation for the maps and an answer to 
the question regarding possible changes in the spatial distribution of rights 
abuses will be presented.
IV. dATA SoURcES
Over the past twenty-five years the significant increase in the number of 
governmental and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with 
human rights situations has spawned a plethora of topical and regional 
reports devoted to the status of those rights. The same can be said of the 
scholarly literature on human rights. However, it is widely recognized that 
it is extremely difficult to use this massive literature to do both longitudinal 
and cross-cultural analysis due to problems regarding the accuracy, validity, 
and comparability of data, as well as the differences in scale, methodolo-
gies, measuring systems, and data processing techniques employed in these 
reports, articles, and monographs.9 Our research uses a database with a 
twenty year history. This database is made up of the collected model letters 
used in the Amnesty International USA (AI) Freedom Writers initiative. Each 
month, AI provided members of the initiative with three letters to be sent 
to heads of government or state, ministries of justice, or law enforcement 
officials, each letter describing a specific case of human rights abuse in their 
country. In all, there were 720 letters available for use. The letters for the 
period September 1986 to August 2006 were accessed on 20 November 
2006 at the Amnesty International Archive located at Columbia University.10 
Letters missing from this archive were provided by Ellen Moore, then of the AI 
Urgent Action Office, located in Nederland, Colorado. Letters for September
2004 through August 2006 were in my files. It must be recognized that the 
letters represent but a sample of the human rights cases AI is concerned 
with. Moreover, there are some obvious, glaring gaps in the geographical 
coverage. Some countries with questionable human rights records, such as 
North Korea (the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea), have never been 
cited in these letters, presumably because AI does not have field workers 
there to identify, report, verify, and continuously monitor abuses.
In addition to the country and date of alleged abuses, the following 
information was extracted from the letters: the precise nature of the abuse 
or abuses, the number and names of individuals said to have been abused, 
and any extenuating circumstances, such as abuse targeting human rights, 
or labor union activists. For mapping purposes the data on abuses by coun-
try were grouped into five periods: 1986–2006, 1986–1991, 1992–1996, 
1997–2001, and 2002–2006. For each of the five periods data were mapped 
using three separate variables: number of abuses by country, percent of total 
abuses, and prevalence of abuses per 1 million inhabitants. One map for the 
entire study period was generated to show the location quotient of abuses 
(Figure 1).11 Additional maps were created showing the spatial distribution 
of fifteen types of abuses described in the letters. A separate map showing 
the total number of abuse types for which a country was cited was also 
produced. In all, thirty-two maps were generated.
Only five maps are included in this article, however. There is a strong 
correlation for each of the three measures of abuse for the five time period 
maps and for the maps showing number and percent of abuse citations 
(Table 1). In contrast there is a very low correlation (rp=0.151) between the 
maps showing number and prevalence rate and percent of total abuses and 
prevalence rate. The entire map set, as a well as a comprehensive bibliog-
raphy of works consulted in writing this article, can be accessed under the 
author’s name at www.uc.edu/geography as well as at the Archives and Rare 
Book Department, Langsam Library, University of Cincinnati.
V. dEScRIpTIoN ANd ANALYSIS of THE MApS
At first glance the map showing the prevalence of human rights abuses for 
the entire study period (Figure 2) seems cluttered and difficult to interpret.
There appear to be few countries that were not cited at some point in time. 
In fact, a simple headcount of countries shows that seventy-two of them, 
amounting to 37.5 percent of all the countries and territories in the world, 
were never cited for abuses. A regional12 breakdown (Table 2) of the percent 
of countries that were accused of human rights abuses further qualifies our 
first impression of the map. There is a wide range of what percent of each 
region’s countries were cited. The Pacific Basin (including Australia and 
New Zealand) and the Caribbean Basin appear relatively immune to human 
rights abuse. At the opposite end of the spectrum, the countries that make 
up the constellation of the Former Soviet Union—Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, 
Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine—seem particularly prone to abuses. Europe 
occupies a place slightly above the low end, while the remaining regions 
cluster towards the high end. A regional subdivision of Europe suggests that 
Eastern and Southern Europe are more prone to human rights abuses than 
the Western and Northern sections. A breakdown of Asia shows that only 
slightly more than a third of the countries in East Asia were cited, while the 
other regions are all in the high 80 percent to 90 percent range of abuse. 
Finally, by looking at the citation records for individual countries (Tables 3 
and 4) it is possible to see which countries are the chronic abusers of human 
rights. For each study period there appear to be on average fifteen chronic 
abusers. The lists do contain repeat offenders, such as China, Myanmar, and 
Syria, although there is also some movement of countries on and off these 
lists. However, China, Myanmar, and Syria have the dubious honor of having 
been cited in all four time periods of the study. In rank order, Asia appears 
to be the most abusive region, followed by the Middle East and North Af-
rica, Latin America, and Africa. These findings parallel those of Diamond 
and Richards, both of whom argue that the geographic patterns of human 
rights performance appear to reflect major cultural or civilizational roots.13
There is one disadvantage to relying on a map showing the prevalence of 
abuse citations: it is lacking a demographic context. To provide one, Figure 3 
shows the rate of citations per million population. Using this metric, twenty 
countries out of the 120 cited for human rights abuses can be considered
the worst abusers (Table 6). Twelve of these (Bahrain, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Brunei, Djibouti, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Guyana, Lebanon, Mauri-
tania, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, and Western Sahara) were not listed in 
Tables 3 or 4. The regional groupings of these twenty countries also differ 
from that found in Table 2: now the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America, 
in that order, appear to be the regions where abuse is most likely to occur.
Finally, the map of locational quotients of human rights prevalence (Fig-
ure 1) needs to be analyzed. In some ways this metric may be considered a 
“fair share” approach to describing the distribution of human rights abuses, 
since the location quotient compares a country’s share of the total number 
of abuses with its share of the total world population. We thus can get a 
sense of which countries are over or under represented in the spectrum of 
human rights abusers. By this standard then, thirty-two countries, including 
China (which by the sheer number of citations can be considered a major 
rights abuser) with location quotients below 1.00 appear to have abuse rates 
lower that we might expect given the size of the populations. On the other 
hand, the remaining eighty-eight countries, with location quotients above 
1.00, clearly form easily recognized regions, such as the Middle East and 
North Africa, Eastern and Southern Africa, and large parts of Latin America, 
the Caribbean, and South and Southeast Asia, where human rights viola-
tions are persistent and notorious. Moreover, it will come as no surprise that 
countries that underwent devolution and civil wars, such as Yugoslavia and
the USSR, have experienced a prevalence of human rights abuses in excess 
of the size of their populations. 
Considering all three maps, the only areas where there seems to be long 
term, systematic improvements in fostering and maintaining human rights are 
in Eastern Europe and East Asia. In Eastern Europe it appears that there was 
sufficient residual liberal democratic experience from the interwar years, so 
that when the Soviet empire disintegrated, respect for human rights could 
revert to what is was in the pre-Soviet past. As for East Asia, the Republic 
of China (Taiwan) and the Republic of Korea (South Korea) have both been 
cited as examples of countries that improved their human rights records, 
presumably because of the impact of globalization.14 However, there is a 
debate regarding how both countries achieved their improvement. Was 
Taiwan’s a function of the broader political initiatives of democratization, 
liberalization, and Taiwanization fostered by Chiang Ching–kuo or was it a 
function of judicial activism?15 The case for improved human rights records
in the Republic of Korea is somewhat more problematic. Due to its presiden-
tial system of government, the country is still cited for human rights abuses, 
especially in regard to the handling of political dissidents and labor rights.16
VI. TYpES of AbUSES
In addition to allowing for the exploration of the different ways to describe 
the distribution of human rights abuses, the database I worked with con-
tained information regarding the types of abuses practiced in each country. 
Amnesty International has identified twenty categories (Table 7). Note that 
there is no relationship between the number and types of abuses in a given 
country because often a country is cited simultaneously for more than one 
type of abuse. Two questions can be answered from these data. First, for 
each country what is the extent of abuse types? Unfortunately, with a few 
exceptions most countries engage in multiple forms of abuse (Figure 4). The 
most egregious examples are Turkey (seven types) and Mexico (eight types). 
Second, are there regional preferences for certain combinations of abuse 
(Table 8)? For example, torture appears to be a special problem in Latin 
America, where it was believed that communist subversion was being carried 
out and had to be stopped at all costs. Although torture was known before 
the rise of authoritarian governments in the 1970s, in the1980s it was more 
broadly applied to political prisoners and to social classes not accustomed to 
torture.17 The most universal citation is for detaining individuals as prisoners
of conscience, although this category may reflect an early, narrow concern 
of Amnesty International as it launched the Freedom Writers initiatives.18 
In addition to regional preferences it is important to keep in mind that 
abuses changed over time in different areas. For example, in Africa despots 
would use the death penalty and genocide as a means of abuse. However, 
when civil wars broke out or during debt crises, the very existence of civil 
strife and the breakdown of states led to refugee abuse and rape as weapons 
of war and abuse. Even the HIV/AIDS epidemic generated discrimination 
and abuse.19 In the Former Soviet Union abuse changed after 1991 from 
terror and torture to official regulation and discrimination.20
VII. WHAT WENT WRoNG?
It is clear from the description and analysis of the maps and the supporting 
statistics in Tables 1–8 that the initial speculation that there should have 
been changes in the spatial patterns of human rights abuses showing an 
improvement in human rights conditions was incorrect. The question that 
needs answering then is what are the reasons that the initial assumption/
hypothesis was incorrect? The broad literature on human rights suggests 
the following as possible explanations for the lack of progress in reducing 
human rights abuses:
While some of these possible explanations may seem self-evident and 
clear, others require some explication. Over the years political scientists and 
sociologists have identified and refined a virtuous cycle linking economic 
development, the establishment of democracy, the rise of civil society, and 
respect for human rights. This cycle is often referred to as modernization 
theory; in its most recent iteration it has been labeled the Washington 
Consensus.21 
Despite historical and statistical support for this theory,22 it has been 
contested, revised, extended, buried, and resuscitated so much that nei-
ther the theory nor the facts supporting it are universally accepted.23 The 
validity of the theory has been challenged for several reasons. First, the 
term “democracy” connotes a broad range of electoral and governmental 
arrangements, and requires—in addition to open, free, and periodic elec-
tions where opposition parties also have a reasonable chance to win—the 
rule of law, an independent judiciary, accountability, and a civil society.24 
Second, historically many models of economic development have led to 
democracy.25 Third, although the theory assumes a link between capital-
ism and democracy, this is not necessarily the case.26 Fourth, it is not clear 
that the goal of economic development is necessarily democracy.27 Fifth, 
modernization theory was formulated without substantial direct reference to 
the experiences of the non-Western political or economic systems.28 Finally, 
economic development can also lead to dictatorships. Despots and dictators 
can get elected by minimally democratic means, and though their policies 
and actions can lead to further economic development, they can also disrupt 
or short-circuit the modernization cycle to the point where human rights 
are violated, not respected. 
This latter observation has led to the enunciation of an alternative to 
modernization theory: authoritarian development, or economic develop-
ment without human rights, where prosperity is valued over freedom.29 As 
with the Asian Values debate regarding human rights, discussed below, the 
origins of the theory of authoritarian development have been traced to Lee 
Kwan Yew.30 Although this theory has been criticized as being based on post 
hoc reasoning31 and its exponents cannot point to even a shred of evidence
that democracy must be sacrificed to foster development,32 it is attractive to 
many third world leaders. In addition to the political stability and economic 
efficiency the theory offers,33 its attractiveness is based on the ability it gives 
politicians to appeal to or give in to voters’ fears, hatreds, and prejudices in 
the face of economic crises34 and to thereby suppress dissent.
And as with modernization theory, authoritarian development has 
evolved and been given an alternative name. In this iteration, termed the 
Beijing Consensus, the emphasis has shifted from development without 
human rights to the importance of educationally driven innovation, change 
led by knowledge, the value of experimentation even if failure results, and 
the importance of sustainability and equitable growth.35 Significantly, the 
Chinese government appears to be very reluctant to claim the theory. They 
are reluctant to alienate the United States, and if the theory fails it would 
undermine the legitimacy of the Chinese Communist party with the public-
ity surrounding the negative aspects of the applied theory—environmental 
disruption, rampant corruption, and growing income disparities.36 Neverthe-
less the model is attractive to leaders of underdeveloped countries because 
it permits them to reject the Western model of development, allows for 
localization where indigenous growth can be fostered, offers the promise 
of security, and of course exculpates and exonerates them from respecting 
human rights.37
Neoliberalism is an economic theory associated with the writings of 
the Austrian political philosopher Friedrich von Hayek and championed by 
Milton Friedman. The prestige and credibility of the theory was enhanced 
when both men won the Nobel Prize in economics (Hayek in 1974 and 
Friedman in 1976).38 The tenets of the theory assume that human well-being 
can best be advanced by liberating individual entrepreneurial freedoms within 
an institutional framework emphasizing strong private property rights, free
markets, and free trade. As such, the role of the state is to guarantee the 
quality and integrity of money and establish the military, defense, police, and 
legal functions required to secure private property rights and to guarantee, by 
force if necessary, the proper functioning of markets. If markets do not exist, 
for example for pollution credits or carbon trading, it is the obligation of the 
state to create them. Once created, these markets should not be interfered 
with by regulators second-guessing markets. Government should get out 
of the business of supplying services, all areas of social provision should 
be privatized, and all sectors of the economy should be deregulated. The 
proper functioning of the resulting system relies on personal responsibility.39
The adoption of neoliberalism by authoritarian governments—frequently 
as part of IMF “adjustment” policies40—can, however, be associated with 
gross violations of human rights, increasing income distribution disparities, 
and high, short-term social costs, especially for migrants.41 Thus, one can 
point to another of the many paradoxes of human rights abuses and the 
process of democratization: democracy allows for an easier acceptance 
of neoliberalism,42 so neoliberal ideology presents itself as pro-democracy 
and pro-human rights.43 At the same time, however, it can be characterized 
as remote from human rights concerns.44 The case can also be made that 
since neoliberalism became the preferred framework for restructuring global 
capitalism, it has led to the emergence of authoritarianism despite neoliberal 
beliefs that authoritarianism hinders economic development.45 Furthermore, 
the neoliberal emphasis on reducing the size and scope of state agencies 
devoted to meeting social needs has the potential to weaken the very groups 
that seek to implement human rights.46
There is no consensus about the impact of globalization on human 
rights. Virtually every social science has its own definition of globalization
and therefore a preferred way of measuring its impact.47 Thus, any debate 
regarding any link between globalization and human rights abuses suffers 
from conceptual, methodological, and measurement problems and results 
in variable and fragile conclusions.48 Moreover, it is not clear how the con-
temporary globalization differs from previous ones.49 
Nevertheless there have been attempts to specify as precisely as possible 
how globalization might be affecting human rights. At one extreme, globaliza-
tion with its emphasis and reliance on rapid communications50 can speed up 
diffusion of the ideas of human rights, make it easier to expose human rights 
infractions, and conduct global consumer campaigns against abuses such as 
abusive labor practices. By eroding geographical remoteness,51 globalization 
can theoretically expedite the creation of an international civil society. At 
the other extreme pessimists argue that globalization has the potential for 
either mitigating or exacerbating human rights conditions.52
Optimists claim that globalization furthers the cause of human rights 
because it has:
For their part, pessimists see globalization as either having the potential 
for, or a history of, delaying the growth of democracy and harming human 
rights.59 Politically, they fear that globalization will expand the hegemony of 
the West, weaken state sovereignty and lead to failed states,60 increase cross-
border corruption and smuggling,61 and result in an increase in terrorism.62 
Economically, there is concern that growth will weaken,63 unemployment 
will increase in part due to outsourcing,64 economic inequality will worsen,65 
the size and influence of labor unions will diminish,66 piracy of intellectual 
property rights will expand,67 and the imposition of financial adjustment 
plans will lead to economic stagnation and even collapse.68 
Globalization may also have a negative impact on social and cultural 
affairs. Pessimists worry about the possible breakdown of indigenous societ-
ies, increases in crime, especially drug trade and human trafficking, a growth 
in police violence, the dismemberment of the welfare state, and a rise in 
illegal migration and refugee movements.69 Finally, they are concerned that 
globalization, with its emphasis on efficiency and profits, will lead to ac-
celeration of environmental degradation.70
Exceptionalism was described by Freud71 as a condition whereby an in-
dividual feels that he or she may claim an exemption from the conventional 
constraints of society because he or she has either suffered enough or has 
been subjected to extenuating circumstances. Just as individuals can make 
the claim of exceptionalism to avoid respecting human rights,72 so too can 
countries. For example, the United States is widely seen as a country that 
makes the exceptionalist claim that its 200 years of history entitles it to its 
own foreign policies and to forge its own approach to ratifying and imple-
menting human rights.73 If the United States can make such a claim other 
countries and regions can do the same,74 and they can use the same variety 
of rationales to make their exceptionalist claim.75 The same reasoning can 
also apply to cultures—for example, Asian or Islamic values. 
Starting in the 1980s and accelerating as the Cold War came to an end, 
Asian and Islamic political leaders and public intellectuals began calling 
for an alternative to Western human rights as embodied in the Universal 
Declaration of Human rights (UDHR), which they felt was fundamentally 
flawed. Both Asian and Islamic perspectives point to the Western emphasis 
on individual rights and freedoms to the detriment of family and community 
responsibilities and values.76 They also note the emphasis on political and 
civil rights rather than economic and social ones.77 Additional Islamic con-
cerns over the source of the UDHR were voiced: it was after all a document 
created by human reason and thus could not replace the rights embedded 
in Islamic tradition, which were derived from the word of God.78 By far the 
most important landmark in criticizing the UHDR was found in the Bangkok 
Declaration, which was adopted by Ministers of Asian States in 1993 in the 
lead-up to the World Conference on Human Rights. Although the Ministers 
reaffirmed their countries’ commitment to the principles of the United Nations 
Charter and the UDHR, they also emphasized their concerns regarding the 
interdependence and indivisibility of human rights, the need for universality 
and objectivity, the non-selectivity of human rights, and the need to respect 
the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in the affairs of other 
states. They also expressed their desire for greater emphasis on economic, 
social, and cultural rights over civil and political ones. 
Such claims or course do not go unchallenged in the West or in Asian 
and Islamic societies. One immediate concern is: Who can speak for all 
of Asia and all of Islam?79 The Asian values debate seems to draw almost 
exclusively on Confucian teachings with little reference to Buddhist, Hindu, 
Taoist, or any other Asian traditions.80 As for Islam, since there is no central 
religious authority, different legal traditions developed.81 Thus it cannot be 
claimed that Islam is monolithic.82 Given these concerns it should not be a
surprise that attempts are made to ascertain what the true motivations are 
for making exceptionalist claims.
The Asian claim seem to revolve around four issues: a desire to push 
back against the West for past grievances and exploitation;83 fear of being 
exposed to further exploitation due to globalization and neoliberalism;84 
belief that the West is in decline and can be challenged; and the wish to 
protect cultural diversity.85 
In contrast, the Islamic claim is thought to revolve around three issues: 
the need to insure that the UDHR is not part of a culture war against Is-
lam;86 the desire to reject Western values as part of jihad;87 and eagerness 
to preserve Islamic values regarding women’s issues, the status of minorities, 
religious freedom, and corporal punishment.88
Western critics of the exceptionalist claim point out that in Asian and 
Islamic countries economic and social rights were not formally enacted or 
implemented, let alone fully protected.89 The West, too, has strong traditions 
of family and social responsibility, as well as work and savings ethics.90 
Critics argue that the adoption of any new technologies and business prac-
tices, regardless of the place of origin, requires other cultural adaptations 
over time.91 Further, rights derived from obligations or duties are not true 
rights.92 Economic success in Asian and Islamic countries occurred before
the adoption of authoritarian capitalism and any discussion of Asian or Is-
lamic values.93 Finally, modernization is not equivalent to Westernization.94
In summary, as an explanation for the persistence of human rights 
abuses, exceptionalism is a debatable basis for either rejecting UDHR and 
substituting non-Western alternatives or for justifying outright violations of 
human rights. In many ways the exceptionalist argument on human rights can 
be rephrased as “a human right is what the local despot says it is.”95 Asian 
and Islamic arguments for particular, idiosyncratic, narrow, and culturally-
based human rights often represent but one often extreme or oversimplified 
position within a broader set of complex and changing traditions.96 Such 
arguments are at best excuses for rejecting the basic premises of modern 
human rights—individualism, humanism, and rationalism.97 Exceptionalism 
may result inadvertently: the European emphasis on public reasoning can 
force the rest of the world to ignore or forget its own experiences with such 
reasoning.98 Furthermore, universal human rights are designed to protect 
the most vulnerable among us from the disabling and degrading suffering 
that result from the most threatening features of both modernization and a 
powerful state.99 At a minimum then, universal human rights are necessary 
because they force us to ask how we can balance what justice requires with 
what those in power demand.100
Given the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis and the 2011 Arab Spring, the 
Asian and Islamic values claims used to reject UDHR rights might be re-
garded as straw men.101 Ironically, during these two crises both the Asian 
and Islamic “street” wanted political changes that would provide open ac-
cess to jobs, economic growth, rule of law, accountability, and the end to 
corruption and cronyism. All of these desiderata would be protected by a 
strong commitment to UDHR by governments and NGOs. 
Hypocrisy, inconsistencies, and appeasement by Western democracies 
(and especially the United States and Britain) when citing countries for human
rights abuses are seen as major reasons countries continue to ignore human 
rights abuses. In particular, the administration of George W. Bush and its 
half-hearted support of democratization, as well as its demands for waivers 
of applicable human rights commitments for US military personnel, is said 
to have given a bad name to democracy.102 Complaints about hypocrisy and 
double standards come from Asia,103 Africa,104 China,105 India,106 the Middle 
East,107 and Muslim countries.108 There are specific complaints about West-
ern policies regarding human rights violations in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
Croatia.109 Concerns about inconsistencies in behavior of Western countries 
have led to and are said to be embedded in the Bangkok Declaration.110 
Similarly, Muslim and Middle Eastern countries have interpreted the double 
standard issue as evidence of the West’s neo-imperial designs on them.111
Signing a human rights convention or joining international human right 
organizations can also be seen as a form of hypocrisy, since signatory states 
often continue to engage in human rights violations. What is the logic behind 
signing? First, it is less costly than paying the political costs of relinquishing 
any authority or rights associated with sovereignty.112 This is especially true 
for recently independent states. There are other advantages to signing human 
rights conventions. Internationally, in addition to more equal treatment by 
other governments, membership in desirable supranational organizations 
such as NATO, or preferential trade agreements may be offered as a reward. 
Domestically, a government’s credibility may be enhanced, uncertainty 
regarding future human rights policies may be reduced, domestic reforms 
may be secured, and worried populations may be reassured.113 
The costs of engaging in such hypocritical behavior are low. Human 
rights conventions have minimal enforcement mechanisms, making viola-
tions feasible.114 Sanctions are rarely imposed, and if they are, they are not 
onerous.115 Similarly, given the fact that human rights treaties can contain 
both instrumental and expressive elements,116 some signatory nations assume 
that there will not be strict enforcement or implementation since no one 
is going to take the exalted ideals of the UDHR seriously enough to actu-
ally demand that nations make the adjustments necessary to comply with 
them.117 Abuses can also be readily blamed on the social and political ten-
sions that develop as economic development progresses118 or on popular119 
or elite demands.120 Habitual behavior, where abuses are seen as “normal” 
opportunistic events, can also be blamed for abuses.121 Authoritarian gov-
ernments attempt to justify continued abuses as ways to suppress terrorism, 
defeat Marxist-Leninist guerillas, or restore law and order. These actions 
usually are widely supported by the public.122 Finally, virtually any country 
that achieved independence after World War II can claim that abuses are 
inadvertent consequences of applying old colonial security laws.
A series of strong regional patterns can be associated with the persistence 
of corruption, instability, and institutional constraints in newly established 
democracies. For example, in Latin America human rights abuses appear to 
be a paradox, because historically there is a long tradition of concern for 
human rights throughout the region.123 After World War II, Latin American 
countries were more open to advocating universal human rights than even 
the United States or Great Britain, and they sent delegations to United Na-
tions conferences on human rights better prepared than any other group to 
engage in serious debate and discussion.124 Nevertheless, as military rule
and authoritarianism spread across the region, a wide range of human rights 
abuses, including those against women, children, indigenous peoples, and 
the landless occurred in increasing frequency in the form of arbitrary arrests, 
disappearances, expulsions, forced exile, political assassinations, election 
irregularities, extra-judicial killings, threats, and torture. Often a coup d’état 
would be followed by decrees stripping citizens of political freedoms. There 
appeared to be no respect for the rule of law, and corruption and fraud in 
the police and governing bodies became widespread.125
Explanations for such patterns of abuse, persistence of corruption, and 
institutional constraints to reform include: the co-opting of civic leaders 
with government positions; limited control over police and the military by 
civilian authorities; the subversion, politicization, and intimidation of judges 
that result in low conviction rates and lenient penalties for abusers; the 
lack of accountability due to the presence of a presidential, rather than a 
parliamentary governmental system; the rise of drug cartels; the preference 
of the elite and civilian leaders for police maintenance of public safety; the 
belief, reinforced by the Roman Catholic Church, in elitism, patrimonialism, 
and corporatism; and the adoption of import-substitution polices that pit 
entrepreneurs against workers when dealing with issues such as economic 
efficiency, wages, and benefits.126
In the Middle East and presumably Muslim majority countries, Islam is 
said to play a long term role in perpetuating behaviors, practices, and poli-
cies that inhibit democracy, development, and respect for human rights.127 
For example, Islamic courts and bureaucracies are historically accustomed 
to dealing with individuals, not corporations. Even when the concept of the 
corporation is assimilated into Islamic business practices and law, nepotism 
and corruption continue since judges and government workers still think of 
transactions as taking place between individuals, and thereby still require 
bribes. In general, the absence of complimentary institutions, a weak image of 
civil society, and the inability to deal constructively with economic failure—
all traceable to Islamic law and socio-cultural practices—inhibit economic 
development, and by extension, democracy and respect for human rights.
The sources of corruption, instability, and institutional constraints in 
Africa differ from those in Latin America and the Middle East. Given the 
great ethnic and religious diversity in African countries, the general goals of 
democracy have been ignored in favor of attempts to ensure national unity, 
stability, and order.128 Furthermore, newly independent African states lack 
the administrative staffs and trained personnel to manage new societies; in-
stead old authoritarian structures inherited from imperial power129 have been 
adapted and legitimized.130 Attempts after 1989 to change the structure of 
regimes and avoid ethnic manipulation131 have failed because new political 
parties have not involved those outside elite circles 
Valuable natural resources, in high demand on world markets, have also 
been implicated in African human rights abuses.132 This issue is virtually the 
same as the one known as the “Curse of Oil” in the Middle East.133 It seems 
that dictators and monarchs can get rich by mining or otherwise harvest-
ing raw materials and using the income to monopolize all instruments of 
power—the army, police, intelligence services—while avoiding all transpar-
ency or power sharing. Power is maintained, and the threat of a coup d’état 
prevented, by repression, buying off opponents,134 high levels of violence,135 
and massive spending on direct services, subsidies, or government service 
employment.136 As a result, all civic and governmental institutions remain 
weak if they exist at all. As Friedman understands this process, natural re-
sources obviate the need to raise governmental funding through taxation. 
If governments have to tax their citizens they need to develop real institu-
tions, guarantee property rights, establish independent courts, develop an 
education system, engage in foreign trade, attract foreign investment, and 
permit freedom of thought.137 According to Amy Ross, in addition to allow-
ing rulers to co-opt citizens via direct cash payments to subjects, natural 
resource wealth eliminates the need to make difficult decisions about more
efficient use of human resources, including women, and engage in foreign 
trade, which stimulates innovation.138 A related economic argument sees 
corruption and embezzlement as endemic in a poor country.139 All of the 
above explanations are compounded in many parts of Africa where draco-
nian legal systems, a lack of institutionalized formality regarding marriage, 
divorce, and inheritance, and open-ended sedition laws contribute to a 
culture characterized by few democratic traditions, little accountability, and 
no respect for human rights.140
As for the Former Soviet Union, its successor states, and more broadly, 
the countries where some version of Marxism or Socialism is the dominant 
political framework, institutional constraints that lead to human rights abuses 
are traced back to varied sources. First, a Russian history of violence applies 
both to extremist governments, such as those of Ivan IV or Peter the Great, 
and to the peasantry that engaged in massacres and pogroms.141 Second, the 
nineteenth century did not provide a long enough liberal tradition to counter 
totalitarian rule.142 Third, the French Revolution and World War I exposed 
both the population and politicians of Russia to cruelties and cheapened 
the value of human life.143 Fourth, the nature and direction of revolution in 
Russia was influenced by Serge Nechaev and Lenin, among others. Nechaev 
assumed that revolution would require the quick and merciless destruction of 
all those who had created a “sick society” in Russia,144 while Lenin espoused 
the notion of dehumanizing and animalizing those who were considered 
enemies and thus expendable.145 With time, the concept of “enemy” would 
also become an elastic category, so that executors would become victims 
and new groups could be eliminated.146 This approach to dealing with 
enemies as well as the idea of endless revolution would also be taken up 
enthusiastically by communist parties in China and Southeast Asia.147 Fifth, 
the Russian Revolution created a situation of crisis where the possibility of 
the state disintegrating was real, so terror was used to insure a strong, stable 
state.148 Sixth, once the Bolsheviks seized power, Lenin imposed a policy 
of violence on the party.149 No overt signs of opposition to this policy were
expressed by other parties or social movements.150 Even the leadership of 
the Russian Orthodox Church capitulated to the pressure of the state and 
opted not to fight even for the protection of human dignity.151 Finally, the 
intellectual framework of Marxist-Leninism contributed to the continuing 
culture of violence in two ways. First, Marxist-Leninism was enveloped in 
an aura of “Scientism” based on Social Darwinism.152 Thus the imposed 
institutional constraints and accompanying human rights abuses were por-
trayed as having a scientific basis. Second, Marx and Engels promoted a 
strong anti-liberal tradition in Western thought,153 and this perspective would 
have a lasting impact not only on Russia, but on China, Laos, Cambodia, 
and Vietnam as well.154
These constraints remained in place after the fall of the Soviet Union in 
1991. In reality the communist system was not dismantled and the heads 
of successor states, despite having been duly elected, were in fact former 
regional rulers.155 To make matters worse, nongovernmental human rights 
and civil society organizations, both domestic and foreign, have been so 
marginalized that they are limited as to what actions they can take to re-
duce constraints to human rights. This has presented Russian leaders with a 
dilemma: although they would like to protect ethnic Russians living in the 
former Soviet republics, they are helpless to do so given past human rights 
policies.156 And the repatriation of some 30 million Russians is not seen as 
an alternative to negotiating the fate of their Russian brethren.157
The chaos dominating what were heralded as free and open elections 
has also cast a pall on the virtuous cycle linking democracy and respect 
for human rights. In particular, the political chaos and resultant economic 
and social instability in Russia,158 Iraq,159 and the Palestinian Authority,160 
not to mention Afghanistan, have been cited as examples of the negative 
effects of elections on the human rights situation in these countries. In fact, 
even the threat of Islamist parties assuming power after winning elections 
has resulted in civil war and deterioration of human rights.161 This paradox,
where democratic processes permit a majority to elect a government com-
mitted to abolishing democracy, leads those concerned about human rights 
to ask why authoritarian or autocratic governments would permit free elec-
tions in the first place.162
Irregular or paramilitary forces as well as off-duty death squads have 
been implicated in “disappearances,” extrajudicial killings, kidnappings, 
rapes, threats, forced labor, political assassinations, indiscriminant attacks by 
guerillas, and the murder of judges, prosecutors, journalists, and politicians 
in Latin America163 and Africa.164 During the wars in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
irregulars would blockade shipments of food and supplies for cities.165 
Whether these fighters act on behalf of powerful landowners or business-
men or for their own revolutionary purposes, they not only target civilians 
but also local and international human rights workers and representatives of 
NGOs.166 The presence of irregular or paramilitary forces presents govern-
ments with multiple political human rights related challenges. Regardless of 
who commits the human rights abuse, the national government inevitably 
gets blamed for not protecting its vulnerable populations, whether they be 
landless peasants or indigenous groups. They are also faulted for not being 
able to control the guilty perpetrators. Such abuses bring into question the 
sincerity and seriousness of governments claiming to respect human rights 
and trying to improve their own human rights record.
The processes contributing to the ten possible theories proposed above to 
explain persistent human rights abuses can operate either serially or simul-
taneously in a country. It is therefore perhaps no surprise that the maps 
and data they are based on did not show any systematic improvement in 
human rights abuses. That conclusion leads to an important question: If we 
wish to pursue an agenda designed to improve human rights, how should 
we proceed? The most obvious choice methodologically for geographers 
would be to build a regression model incorporating the various measures
of abuse used in the maps with key measures for each of the nine possible 
explanations for abuse. Although the resulting model might clearly indicate 
the combinations and permutations of risk factors for abuse in each country, 
I doubt the model will generate viable policy options. Therefore, I will take 
another approach and review those options for intervention recommended 
in the human rights literature.
One approach is to assume each country is sui generis167 and rely on 
a bottom up approach to confronting human rights issues. This strategy has 
been successful especially in enacting changes in legal systems to support 
economic development and women’s rights.168 Under this approach local 
human rights workers are advised:
This approach doubts the efficacy of international campaigns, especially 
those that seek to embarrass rights-abusing individuals or elites.174
In contrast, there are those who recommend relying heavily on the 
international organizations to take the lead and carry the burden of extend-
ing human rights so long as this work is carried out in a culturally sensitive 
manner.175 This position has become increasingly problematic, however. It 
is becoming apparent that academic and professional organizations and 
societies are increasingly reluctant to mount campaigns on behalf of indi-
viduals or groups suffering from human rights abuses, lest doing so might 
lessen their chances of conducting joint research with scientists from that 
country at some future date.176
A more accommodating position acknowledges that although the West 
cannot single-handedly confront other cultures, international human rights 
organizations do have a role to play in supporting local human rights 
groups.177 They can gather, publish, and disseminate documentation on a 
country-by-country basis on the status of human rights. They can provide 
testimony to international organizations on the state of human rights, offer 
training for human rights and labor leaders, members of the police, the 
military, the judiciary, local elites, and politicians, and they can work to 
rebuild justice systems and encourage the rule of law.178 For their part, local 
human rights groups are charged with the same challenges and goals they 
would have assumed in the absence of international assistance. Added to 
this list would be working at issue creation and agenda setting within the 
elite, proposing new human rights legislation as well as institutional pro-
cedures and reforms, actually engaging in discourse with the government 
over human rights issues, and monitoring state compliance with human 
rights obligations.179
One final suggested approach for improving human rights is to increase 
use of regional human rights councils. In Africa these have been reasonably 
successful in disseminating information about human rights abuses, providing 
early warnings of impending human rights problems, and advancing early 
action mechanisms to curb human rights abuses.180
Ix. coNcLUSIoN
It is important to remember that the analysis and explanation of maps of 
human rights abuses included in this article represent but one approach
geographers can use when approaching human rights issues. Over the 
twentieth and twenty-first centuries geographers have fashioned and revised 
a series of organizational and methodological “traditions.”181 In addition the 
subject matter of geography has been divided into categories: systematic 
(concentrating on specific subjects such as political geography, economic 
geography, urban geography, and environmental geography), regional 
geography, and spatial techniques (including quantitative and qualitative 
analysis, computer cartography, GIS, and remote sensing). Contemporary 
geographers conduct their research within a multitude of philosophical 
and epistemological orientations including positivism, humanism, Marxism 
(radical and critical), postmodernism, feminism, applied, post-structuralism, 
and post-colonialism.182 Furthermore, contemporary geographers have much 
more sophisticated means of accessing, mapping, and analyzing data than 
previously dreamed. This means that geographers focusing on human rights 
issues have multiple ways of approaching and reporting their findings. The 
challenge for human rights researchers is to discover how this variety of ap-
proaches can be incorporated in their work. For geographers the challenge 
is two-fold: to make their work more accessible to the human rights com-
munity by publishing more broadly and to incorporate the research of the 
human rights community into their own work. This dual strategy approach 
has proven useful in Asian and Jewish Studies.183
