Title:
Gun Shops as Local Institutions: Federal Firearms Licensees, 
Social Disorganization, and Neighborhood Violent Crime
Abstract:
acknowledge (Braman and Kahan 2003). A rural farmer who uses a ?rearm to
hunt will view ?rearm retailers differently than an urbanite who fears gun vio-
lence and supports gun control (Kleck, Gertz, and Bratton 2009). Our theoreti-
cal argument is based on the latter context.
Second, although we argue that gun shops directly in?uence crime by providing
suitable targets and indirectly in?uence crime by signaling disorder and discourag-
ing informal social control efforts, we cannot directly test our proposed mechan-
isms. This is particularly the case with the indirect effects, which we cannot test
because we do not have measures of social control or neighborhood trust. This is a
common issue confronted by researchers studying social disorganization. A poten-
tial avenue for future research, then, would be to gather social control or organiza-
tional measures in a few cities and then test the relationship again.
To conclude, we offer a few policy considerations that stem from our ?ndings.
Given that ?rearm ownership is a constitutional right in the United States, policy
efforts seeking to limit the potential negative effects of gun shops must not hin-
der gun rights. FFLs are a crucial component of ?rearm regulation and com-
merce in the United States (Braga et al. 2002) and must be allowed to operate so
that legal gun ownership may exist. Any policies to limit crime associated with
FFLs must acknowledge this reality.
With this context in mind, our ?rst policy consideration considers the indirect
effects of gun shops on crime, where perceptions of disorder stymie local social
control efforts. If crime rates are increasing because residents hold negative
views of the gun shop and its effect on the neighborhood, efforts to manage resi-
dents’ awareness of these shops could reduce fear and its associated effects.
Some municipalities already regulate gun shop appearance. For example, munic-
ipal codes in Washington, DC, and Chicago make it illegal to display ?rearms in
the windows of a gun shop. While this could reduce awareness of the shop, it
could also create unintended consequences. For instance, if businesses opt to
comply by blacking out windows, it could contribute to disorder and crime by
making the shop appear boarded up or neglected. However, while we do not
know whether such ordinances improve the community or stigmatize gun shops
in ways that make their presence more evident, municipality ordinances on gun
dealers in general may be a viable policy instrument for improving neighbor-
hood crime rates. Future research needs to assess what dealer regulations exist
and how their enforcement and implementation in?uences the effects of such
policies on neighborhood crime.
Another policy consideration is for cities and states to withhold licenses for
new gun shops seeking to open in fragile neighborhoods with a greater risk of
increased crime. Gun shops are not uniformly dispersed across the metro area.
In the cities in our analysis, there were very few gun shops in the richest or the
poorest neighborhoods. Exposure to gun shops was highest in tracts with aver-
age levels of disadvantage, and on average, the tracts with no gun shops did not
have higher levels of residential instability than neighborhoods with gun shops
(table 1). Because of this, many of the poorest neighborhoods, which are the
most susceptible to crime, were not affected by gun shops. However, other disor-
ganized neighborhoods, which are also vulnerable to decline and crime
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Direct Effects of Local Institutions on Crime
 Indirect Effects of Institutions on Crime
 Firearms Dealers and Crime
 Expectations
 Data and Methods
 Findings
 Discussion and Conclusion
 Supplementary Material
 About the Authors


Text:
----------------------
Recent research on the relationship between local institutions and violent crime
has drawn on both routine activities theory and social disorganization theory to
argue that local institutions likely have both direct and indirect effects on crime
rates (Kubrin et al. 2011; Kubrin and Hipp 2014). Institutions can directly in?u-
ence crime by providing opportunities and potential victims for criminal behav-
ior (Cohen and Felson 1979; Roncek and Maier 1991; Wilcox and Eck 2011).
They can indirectly affect crime rates by sending signals of social (dis)organiza-
tion, which can affect social tie formation and social control efforts (Peterson,
Krivo, and Harris 2000; Kubrin et al. 2011; Kubrin and Hipp 2014).
Such research has focused primarily on institutions that provide ample suit-
able targets and crime victims, such as bars, pawn shops, and payday lenders
(e.g., Roncek and Maier 1991; Kubrin and Hipp 2014). We explore a different
institution that likely affects crime rates: the gun shop.1 Routine activities theory
suggests that by being a business with desirable goods, gun shops could directly
affect crime by providing targets and victims. Social disorganization theory sug-
gests that gun shops could also have a signi?cant indirect effect on neighbor-
hood crime by negatively in?uencing perceptions of the neighborhood, sending
signals of disorganization that discourage residents from engaging in social con-
trol efforts. Speci?cally, because gun dealers can be viewed as undesirable busi-
nesses that are frequently the target of NIMBY (Not in My Backyard) efforts,
the presence of gun shops could suggest that residents do not care enough about
the neighborhood to block the shop’s establishment, or that residents were
unable to do so. This could discourage future social control efforts, as such ef-
forts may seem futile or unappreciated. Additionally, gun shops signal that guns
are present in a neighborhood, which could raise fear among those uncomfort-
able around ?rearms, thus discouraging them from intervening when disorder
occurs. It could also suggest that the area is dangerous—guns are available
because they are needed for protection—which could further discourage infor-
mal social control efforts. Subsequently, we would expect to ?nd higher crime
rates in neighborhoods with gun shops, as the associated fear and negative per-
ceptions might keep residents from engaging in social control efforts, while the
shops themselves might attract crime by providing suitable targets. It is not that
the guns sold generate crime, but that the shops trigger processes that lead to
more crime.
To test the relationship between gun shops and crime, we employ multilevel
Poisson models and three unique datasets—the National Neighborhood Crime
Study (NNCS), the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives’
Federal Firearms Licensees Database (FFLD), and the National Establishment
Time-Series Longitudinal Business Database (NETS)—to examine the effects of
gun shop presence on neighborhood crime rates. The NNCS provides tract-level
crime data for eighty-nine US cities in 2000. The FFLD is a complete list of all
federally licensed ?rearms dealers in the United States, while NETS provides
data on business locations. These datasets allow us to test whether gun shops
are associated with elevated crime rates at the neighborhood level, while also
accounting for neighborhood and gun shop characteristics.
This study is a potentially signi?cant extension. Most empirical research on the
relationship between gun shops and violent crime has examined larger geographic
units, such as cities and counties (Wiebe et al. 2009), which are too big to accu-
rately measure neighborhood effects, or gun shows (Duggan, Hjalmarsson, and
Jacob 2010), which are a short-term phenomenon unlikely to have lasting effects.
To our knowledge, this is the ?rst study to examine this relationship at the neigh-
borhood level. Additionally, this research expands our understanding of the role
of local institutions on crime outcomes, not only by examining a different institu-
tion—gun shops—but also by examining the relationship nationwide. Existing
research has focused on institutions in a single city. Finally, given that political dis-
cussions around ?rearms have grown increasingly heated, studies exploring poten-
tial associations between ?rearms commerce and crime are useful contributions
for policymakers. This is especially true given the paucity of studies on ?rearms
dealers.
Direct Effects of Local Institutions on Crime
Research has established a connection between local institutions and crime rates.
These studies have primarily focused on institutions associated with increased
crime. Such institutions likely raise crime both directly and indirectly (Kubrin
et al. 2011; Kubrin and Hipp 2014). Studies that focus on the direct effects of
crime often draw on routine activities theory. This theory posits that some insti-
tutions can facilitate crime by routinely providing potential targets and by
encouraging behaviors that might lead to crime (Cohen and Felson 1979;
Roncek and Maier 1991; Groff and Lockwood 2014).
While routine activities theory has been used to explain the association
between numerous institutions and crime, bars probably provide the most illus-
trative example of how an institution can directly in?uence crime rates. First,
bars could lead to increased crime by attracting outsiders to the neighborhood,
which can make local social control more dif?cult. Residents are less likely to
successfully intervene when complete strangers cause disorder than when their
neighbors are disorderly (Jacobs 1961; Roncek 1981; Roncek and Maier 1991).
Bars can also attract potential criminals (Frisbie et al. 1977), or cause people to
break norms they normally follow when sober (Felson 1986). Finally, bars pro-
vide an attractive target for crime, as both the customers and the establishment
are likely ?ush with cash (Cohen and Felson 1979; Roncek and Maier 1991),
and because the customers are more likely to be impaired and thus less capable
of defending themselves (Roncek and Maier 1991).
Of the direct effects of bars on crime, the presence of suitable targets is proba-
bly the most essential. Researchers repeatedly have found that institutions asso-
ciated with increased crime have cash-based transactions, which attract robbers
(Wright and Decker 1997; Bernasco and Block 2011; Bernasco, Block, and
Ruiter 2013; Kubrin and Hipp 2014). Another key characteristic is the number
of suitable targets an institution attracts. Institutions can contribute to crime
simply by concentrating larger numbers of potential targets in a small area. This
mechanism has been used to partially explain the crime increases associated
with Wal-Mart stores (Wolfe and Pyrooz 2014).
Indirect Effects of Institutions on Crime
These characteristics of institutions directly in?uence crime rates, but institutions
have other qualities that could indirectly affect crime rates as well. Research con-
sidering the indirect effects of institutions on crime draws on social
disorganization theory to argue that institutions can signi?cantly affect crime
rates by shaping perceptions of disorganization in the neighborhood (Peterson,
Krivo, and Harris 2000; Kubrin et al. 2011; Kubrin and Hipp 2014). According
to this theory, residents are less likely to engage in social control efforts—which
help limit crime in an area—when they believe that their neighborhood is disor-
ganized. Thus, if an institution sends signals of disorder, it could negatively
impact social control efforts, which could lead to elevated crime rates.
Conversely, if an institution signals organization, it could encourage participa-
tion in social control efforts and lead to a reduction in crime. Subsequently, if re-
sidents think that an institution brings or signals trouble and disorder, it will be
associated with decreases in social control and increases in crime rates, while in-
stitutions that send positive signals about the community will be associated with
reductions in crime.
This application of social disorganization theory stems from modern interpreta-
tions of Shaw and McKay’s (1942) work on juvenile delinquency. Modern social
disorganization theory argues that crime results when residents lack the capacity
to engage in social control, or to address problems and disorder within their
neighborhoods (Kubrin and Weitzer 2003). A neighborhood’s capacity for social
control is shaped by social ties and local organizational presence, which allow re-
sidents to develop shared norms and expectations of acceptable behavior. Once
these expectations have been established, residents use their social ties and organi-
zations to keep undesirable behavior in check. Their unwillingness to engage in
such social control efforts, however, is shaped by their perceptions of the neigh-
borhood and other residents’ willingness to maintain it. If residents believe that
their neighbors care about the neighborhood and will work to maintain shared ex-
pectations, they will be more likely to intervene when things are awry. If they
believe that the neighborhood is disorganized—that no one cares and that no one
will try to ?x problems—the residents will be less likely to participate in social
control efforts (Sampson, Raudenbush, and Earls 1997; Sampson 2012). These
perceptions of disorder can be shaped by the physical characteristics of the neigh-
borhood; dilapidated housing, for example, often sends the signal that the neigh-
borhood is in decline, which can then lead to disinvestment (Massey and Denton
1993). Institutions could send a similar message. If a business is undesirable, it can
signal that the neighborhood is in decline, or that no one cares enough to keep
such undesirable businesses out of the neighborhood or at least somewhat in order
(Kubrin et al. 2011; Kubrin and Hipp 2014). This could then discourage residents
from engaging in social control efforts.
The social and demographic characteristics of a neighborhood can also dis-
courage residents from engaging in social control. Shaw and McKay (1942)
argued that social tie formation is in?uenced by neighborhood disadvantage and
heterogeneity. Poverty limits bonding through its association with high rates of
housing turnover (Bursik 1988). People are more likely to know their neighbors
in stable neighborhoods with low population turnover (Guest et al. 2006).
Social ties are weaker in ethnically and racially homogeneous neighborhoods
and neighborhoods with large immigrant populations, because communication
and bonding are more dif?cult when there are language and cultural differences
(Shaw and McKay 1942). These factors also in?uence the ef?cacy of local orga-
nizations that might encourage social bonding. People are more likely to partici-
pate in organizations when they have lived or intend to live in an area for an
extended period of time (Wandersman et al. 1987), while organizations tend to
be weak when neighborhoods have high housing turnover, experience elevated
poverty, or are racially or ethnically heterogeneous (Triplett, Gainey, and Sun
2003). All of these characteristics can contribute to a neighborhood’s level of
disorganization.
The existing level of (dis)organization in a neighborhood could affect how the
neighborhood responds to undesirable institutions. In a study of alcohol outlets,
like bars and lounges, Pridemore and Grubesic (2012) found that the effect of
alcohol outlet density on assault rates was weaker in areas characterized by
social organization. They argued that organized areas were better able to exer-
cise informal social control over both the patrons and management of alcohol
outlets, and that they were better able to marshal government resources to main-
tain order. This suggests that levels of (dis)organization—which can be affected
by the institutions themselves—can also moderate the relationship between
unappealing institutions and crime.
In sum, institutions can directly contribute to crime by providing suitable tar-
gets and attracting strangers to an area, and can indirectly contribute to crime by
sending signals that an area is disorganized, which can discourage residents from
engaging in social control efforts. Neighborhoods with low levels of disadvantage
and turnover may be able to draw on economic resources and existing social ties
to limit the direct effects of the institution on crime rates. However, disadvantaged
neighborhoods or those that have high levels of residential instability may fare
poorly when an undesirable institution is present, weakening local social control
efforts.
Firearms Dealers and Crime
Although existing research has focused on institutions like bars and payday len-
ders, there are other institutions that could be associated with increased crime.
Gun dealers provide an interesting case. As businesses, routine activities theory
would predict that gun shops would be associated with elevated crime rates
because they provide suitable targets and desirable goods. This makes them simi-
lar to bars and payday lenders. Gun dealers are also like payday lenders in that
they are often seen as undesirable. Social disorganization theory suggests that
undesirable institutions lead to crime by disrupting social control efforts.
Despite these similarities, ?rearms dealers are a unique case. Firearms dealers
have to locate somewhere, despite often being seen as undesirable and a detri-
ment to tourism and other businesses (Lewis 2010). This is due to the fact that
?rearms dealers are fundamental to the constitutional right of ?rearm owner-
ship, as the 1968 Gun Control Act mandates that all newly manufactured ?re-
arms be sold from businesses with a Federal Firearms License (FFL) (Cook,
Molliconi, and Cole 1995; Braga et al. 2002). Because the Constitution protects
gun ownership, and gun owners are required to purchase new ?rearms from
businesses with FFLs, dealers are a necessity in the marketplace, unlike other
undesirable places (e.g., payday lenders) (Winkler 2013).
In spite of this, gun shops often face NIMBY efforts and have been the target
of local ordinances that limit the number and location of gun dealerships within
a city (Calhoun 2014). This negative reaction is likely tied to people’s response
to guns. Although recent national public opinion surveys suggest that a majority
of Americans think that owning a ?rearm will protect against criminal victimiza-
tion (Doherty, Kiley, and Weisel 2014), these ?ndings do not hold in urban
areas. Surveys of urban residents consistently ?nd that urbanites feel that guns
make urban environments less safe, and that urbanites are more likely to support
policies that restrict private access to ?rearms than rural residents (Blocher
2013). Thus, in urban areas (the focus of this paper), gun shops are likely to be
unwelcome.
Regardless of the area, however, feelings toward guns are strongly shaped by
fear and concerns over safety. In some cases, the fear comes from the presence of
guns—studies have demonstrated that increased ?rearm prevalence can reduce
feelings of safety (Hemenway, Solnick, and Azrael 1995; Miller, Azrael, and
Hemenway 2000). In other cases, acquiring a gun stems from external fears.
Individuals are more likely to carry guns when they feel law enforcement and
the criminal justice system are insuf?cient to protect them from crime
(McDowall and Loftin 1983; Young, McDowall, and Loftin 1987). People are
also more likely to consider purchasing a ?rearm for protection (Kleck et al.
2011) and to actually carry a ?rearm when they fear victimization in their com-
munity (Lizotte et al. 2000; Molnar et al. 2004; Watkins, Huebner, and Decker
2008; Felson and Pare 2010). Thus, fear likely plays a signi?cant role in percep-
tions of guns, either as a direct result of the presence of guns in an area, or
because guns are sought as protection.
Such fears could shape residents’ perceptions when they see gun shops in their
community. Seeing a gun shop in the neighborhood signals that “guns are pres-
ent here,” which could increase fear among those who feel less safe when guns
are prevalent. The presence of a gun shop could also increase fear among those
who turn to guns for protection, if those individuals see the presence of a gun
shop as a signal that other residents feel the need to carry guns, or that guns are
necessary in the area. These fears could discourage people from engaging in
social control efforts. Finally, if many urban residents see gun shops as undesir-
able, seeing a gun shop in a neighborhood could send the signal that no one in
the neighborhood cared enough to stop (or was incapable of stopping) the gun
shop from locating there. This can also depress social control efforts by making
it seem that such efforts will be unsuccessful or unappreciated. All of these fac-
tors could ultimately lead to higher crime rates. Thus, gun dealers likely lead to
increased crime in an area directly, through mechanisms predicted by routine
activities theory—providing suitable targets—and indirectly, through disrup-
tions to social control efforts, as predicted by social disorganization theory.
Of course, not all gun dealers are the same. Many people purchase guns at
sporting goods and department stores, which do not necessarily send the same
signals to the community as a gun-speci?c store might. Some places may even
recruit outlets that sell guns, like Wal-Mart or Bass Pro Shops, into the commu-
nity, believing they may bring jobs and tax revenue. In such cases, the social dis-
organization processes likely play a smaller role than processes relating to
routine activities. Likewise, pawn shops, which have been associated with in-
creases in crime rates (Kubrin and Hipp 2014), are also qualitatively different
than dealers that focus solely on guns. When we discuss gun shops, we are refer-
ring to all Type 1 (dealers) and Type 2 (pawn shop) Federal Firearms Licensees
collectively, which includes everything from a gun-speci?c store (hereafter “tra-
ditional dealers” or “dealers”) to pawnshops and Wal-Marts. We account for
these differences in our analysis, but think that the processes we discuss play a
role in the gun shop–crime relationship to some degree, regardless of shop type.
Expectations
Following our argument—that gun shops in urban areas provide suitable targets
for crime and can signal disorder in a way that affects social control efforts—we
have three hypotheses. First, we expect that higher gun shop prevalence will be
associated with higher crime rates in urban neighborhoods. Second, we expect
that higher gun shop prevalence in urban areas will be associated with higher
crime rates regardless of gun shop type. Third, given research that indicates that
neighborhood organization limits the effects of bars on local crime rates
(Pridemore and Grubesic 2012), we expect that this effect will be more pro-
nounced in unstable neighborhoods and neighborhoods characterized by
disadvantage.
Data and Methods
To examine the association between gun shops and crime, we rely on data from the
National Neighborhood Crime Study (NNCS), the Federal Firearms Licensees
Database (FFLD), and the National Establishment Time-Series Longitudinal
Business Database (NETS). The NNCS contains Uniform Crime Report (UCR)
data for violent and property crime at the census-tract level in a representative sam-
ple of ninety-one cities with a population over 100,000 in 1999 (Peterson and
Krivo 2010b). It also includes demographic and socioeconomic data at the tract,
city, and metro level. Although there are 9,563 census tracts in ninety-one cities in
the full NNCS, we restrict our data to the eighty-nine NNCS cities that provided
tract-level homicide data, leaving 8,994 tracts in our analysis. We use tracts as a
proxy for neighborhoods.
The FFLD is a complete listing of federally licensed ?rearms dealers (FFLs) in
the United States. Maintained by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives (ATF), the FFLD contains information on all companies or indivi-
duals with licenses to manufacture or sell ?rearms and ammunition in the
United States. The FFLD includes address information, which we geocoded and
tracted to get shop locations. The full FFLD contains information on nine classes
of FFL licenses, which include everything from ?rearms dealers to manufacturers
and importers. We only include data on Type 1 and Type 2 Federal Firearms
Licensees—dealers and pawn shops, respectively—as these are the only catego-
ries that pertain to local ?rearm sales.
The NETS Database provides “annual snapshots” of Dun and Bradstreet’s
archival establishment data (taken every January). This dataset indicates which
establishments were open for business each year. These establishment-level data
provide information on business name, address, and industry classi?cation
(Walls and Associates 2012). We use this information to identify the number of
retail establishments (grocery stores, pharmacies, gas stations, etc.) in each tract.
The dependent variables are three-year (1999–2001) average counts of tract-
level homicides and robberies. Criminologists commonly use multiyear counts of
crime to minimize the impact of annual ?uctuations in rare events at small levels
of aggregation (Krivo, Peterson, and Kuhl 2009). While the NNCS includes
tract-level counts of property crime, aggravated assaults, and forcible rapes, we
focus on homicides and robberies. This is mostly due to data availability. Some
police departments do not report rape data due to local reporting laws and poli-
cies, while others exclude aggravated assault due to data quality concerns
(Peterson and Krivo 2010a, p. 130). As a result, including aggravated assault,
rape, and property crimes would substantially reduce the sample size.
Following Wiebe et al. (2009), the central tract-level independent variable is a
count of licensed ?rearms dealers per 10,000 people within a given census tract.
We take the natural log of this rate (after adding a small constant of 1.0 to all
tracts) to account for both skewness and possible nonlinearity in the relationship
between dealers and violence at the local level.
To account for the qualitative differences between gun shops, we consider dif-
ferent types of FFL holders, differentiating between dealers, pawn shops, and big
box stores, using a count of each type of dealer per 10,000 residents in each
tract. The dealer (FFL Type 1) and pawn shop (FFL Type 2) indicators are avail-
able in the FFLD. To account for sporting goods and department stores, we
identi?ed all of the FFL Type 1 licensees that were licensed to operate more than
one place of business, and then identi?ed the FFL licenses issued to corporate
entities rather than an individual person. We identi?ed such businesses as “big
box” stores.2
In line with previous social disorganization research, we include measures of
neighborhood disadvantage and residential instability. The neighborhood disad-
vantage variable is an index composed of the average of summed z-scores for six
variables that measure the percent of the tract population that is employed in
low-wage jobs in the secondary sector; is employed in professional or manage-
ment careers (reverse-coded); is jobless and in the working age population
(16–64 years old); is living in female-headed households; is living in poverty;
and has at least a high school diploma (for the population over 25 years old;
reverse-coded) (? = .92). Residential instability is measured using an index of
the average of summed z-scores for the percentage of housing units that are
renter-occupied and the percentage of the tract population that lived in a differ-
ent residence in 1995 (? = .63). Both indices have been used in prior neighbor-
hood analyses of crime using the NNCS (Krivo, Peterson, and Kuhl 2009;
Peterson and Krivo 2010a; Ramey 2013).
To control for other demographic factors that are theoretically related to neigh-
borhood crime rates, we include measures of percent non-Hispanic black, per-
cent Hispanic (any race), percent young male, and an index of immigrant
concentration. The percent young male variable indicates the percent of the tract
that is male and between 15 and 34 years old, as this population is believed to
be particularly disposed to crime. The immigrant concentration variable is an
index of the average of summed z-scores for three variables that measure the per-
cent of the tract population that is foreign born, arrived in the United States
between 1995 and 2000, and does not speak English (? = .95). To account for
the potential spatial clustering of violent crime, we include a spatial lag of the
violent crime rates in surrounding tracts. The spatial lags were calculated in
Geoda using a ?rst-order queen criterion.
Finally, because gun shops are often located near other institutions that could
lead to increased crime rates, such as other commercial establishments, we con-
trol for the number of total retail establishments per 10,000 residents in each
tract. Other researchers have used this data to examine the relationship between
retail institutions and local crime rates (Stacy, Ho, and Pendall 2016).
Although the NNCS is a nationally representative sample of large US cities, our
level-2 independent and control variables are measured at the metropolitan level.
We use metros instead of cities because we need to control for the larger context
of gun shop presence, and controlling for the concentration of gun shops at the
metro level provides a more accurate measure of how many gun shops are in the
area. While many large cities have enacted local ordinances limiting the number
of licensed gun dealers within city limits, these laws do not extend to the suburbs
or townships in the rest of the metropolitan area. Just accounting for the city,
then, could result in a severe underestimation of gun shop presence. For example,
while the city of Chicago only had three licensed ?rearms dealers in 2000, the
Chicago metropolitan area had 854 shops. To appropriately account for the
larger context of gun shops, we include a measure of metro-level FFLs, which is
analogous to the tract-level variable. Results of all models with all level-2 variables
measured at the city level yielded similar ?ndings and are available by request.
We also include controls for several other metro-level variables that are asso-
ciated with crime outcomes. We include measures of metro disadvantage, metro
residential instability, (? = .52), metro immigrant concentration (? = .96), metro
percent non-Hispanic Black, metro percent Hispanic (any race), and metro per-
cent young males, which all use the same calculations as their tract-level counter-
parts. A measure of metro manufacturing, de?ned as the percent of the
employed civilian population age 16 and over employed in manufacturing indus-
tries, controls for labor market activity in the metro. We control for the higher
crime rates found in larger cities by including a measure of metropolitan popula-
tion (logged). We control for regional variation in both violent crime rates and
?rearm usage by including measures of census region (South and West, with the
rest of the country as the reference category).
Finally, we include a measure of black-white segregation to account for the
higher rates of neighborhood violence found in segregated cities. It is calculated
using the index of dissimilarity (D), which measures the relative evenness of two
groups within smaller units (like tracts). It indicates the percentage of one group
that would have to move to a new tract for there to be an even distribution of
members from both groups in each tract in the metro. It is calculated using the
following formula:
where aj and bj represent the number of members of the two respective groups
residing in tract j, and where A and B are the total number of each group in the
metro.
To examine rates of neighborhood violence, this paper employs separate multi-
level models for homicide and robbery using HLM 7.01 with tracts at level 1
and metropolitan areas at level 2. Because homicides and robberies are rare
events within small units, we use nonlinear Poisson models, specifying these
counts with variable exposure by tract population. This strategy is the empirical
equivalent of analyzing rates of neighborhood homicide and robbery (Osgood
2000).3 Additionally, the variances of our dependent variables are considerably
larger than their means, violating a common assumption of the Poisson model.
Controlling for this overdispersion at level 1 in HLM is analogous to a negative
binomial model. All continuous control variables are grand-mean centered in
the analysis.
Findings
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all variables included in the study, as
well as tracts with or without FFLs. As discussed earlier, most neighborhoods in
large US cities do not have gun shops. As a result, the average number of shops
per 10,000 population is relatively small (1.59 per 10,000). However, in neigh-
borhoods with at least one gun shop, there are 5.7 FFLs per 10,000 residents, on
average. Most gun shops (1.8 per 10,000) in the sample are traditional ?rearms
dealers, but there is variation in the number of dealers, pawn shops, and big box
stores across US neighborhoods.
On average, neighborhoods in large US cities had homicide rates of 2.19 and
robbery rates of about 47 per 10,000 residents. Notably, measures of residential
instability are slightly higher in neighborhoods with FFLs than in the total sam-
ple, but such neighborhoods have relatively low disadvantage scores compared
to the national average. Neighborhoods without FFLs are slightly more disad-
vantaged than the national average. Neighborhoods without FFLs are also more
racially and ethnically diverse than neighborhoods with FFLs. For example,
neighborhoods without FFLs have residential populations that are almost half
racial-ethnic minority (29 percent African-American and 20 percent Hispanic)
and 17 percent foreign born, compared to average FFL neighborhoods, which
are Whiter (15 percent African American and 19 percent Hispanic) and have rel-
atively fewer foreign-born residents (14 percent). Finally, there are more retail
establishments per 10,000 residents in neighborhoods with FFLs than in neigh-
borhoods without FFLs.
Turning to the metro-level variables, the average large US metro has around
3.4 licensed ?rearms dealers per 10,000 residents. Although neighborhoods with
FFLs are located in metro areas with relatively more FFLs, tracts without FFLs
remain located in metro areas with at least 2.5 shops per 10,000 residents.
Unlike at the tract level, levels of metro disadvantage, residential instability, and
racial and ethnic diversity are similar across neighborhoods with and without
FFLs. Notably, compared to neighborhoods without FFLs, neighborhoods with
FFLs are located in smaller metro areas (2.6 million versus 4 million) and are
more likely to be located in the South or in the West.
The descriptive results presented in table 1 support further consideration of
the relationship between FFLs and neighborhood violence. Speci?cally, while
the higher rates of homicide and robbery in neighborhoods without FFLs suggest
that gun dealers are not opening stores in high-crime neighborhoods, the true
relationship between FFLs and local crime rates may be concealed by structural
factors. To assess whether these factors mediate or moderate the relationship
between FFLs and crime, we now turn to a discussion of ?ndings from multilevel
models of homicide and robbery.4
Table 2 presents the coef?cients and standard errors for separate multilevel
Poisson (with variable exposure) models of homicide and robbery, using the
neighborhood concentration of all FFLs as our key predictor variable. For both
dependent variables, model 1 presents the results of our fully conditional models
with all predictor variables and models 2 and 3 include interactions between our
logged FFL variable and neighborhood residential instability and disadvantage,
respectively. Looking ?rst at model 1 in table 2, there is a signi?cant positive
association between the concentration of FFLs in a tract and levels of both homi-
cide and robbery. Speci?cally, controlling for other relevant population factors,
a 100 percent difference in the number of licensed ?rearms dealers per 10,000 is
associated with 8.5 percent [(e[.082] ? 1) * 100] higher homicide rates and 14
percent [(e[.131] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery rates.
Turning to model 2, we observe a signi?cant positive main effect coef?cient for
the relationship between FFLs and violent crime. Furthermore, there are signi?cant
positive coef?cients for the interaction between FFLs and residential instability.
These results indicate that the positive relationship between FFLs and violence is
stronger in neighborhoods with higher levels of residential instability. At one stan-
dard deviation below mean residential instability, tracts with twice as many tradi-
tional ?rearms dealers per 10,000 have 1.01 percent [(e[.068+(?1*.057)] ? 1) * 100]
higher homicide rates and 6.47 percent [(e[.112+(?1*.050)] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery
rates than similarly stable tracts. Conversely, at one standard deviation above
mean residential instability, tracts with twice the number of ?rearms dealers per
10,000 have 13.36 percent [(e[.068+(1*.057)] ? 1) * 100] higher homicide rates and
27.4 percent [(e[.112+(1*.050)] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery rates than similarly unsta-
ble tracts. In model 3, we observe a positive and signi?cant main effect coef?cient
between FFLs and homicides or robberies, yet interactions between FFLs and
neighborhood disadvantage are insigni?cant.
The coef?cients for several control variables are signi?cant and merit discus-
sion. Notably, variables for neighborhood disadvantage and residential instabil-
ity are signi?cantly and positively associated with neighborhood violence.
Furthermore, the number of retail establishments per 10,000 residents is signi?-
cantly and positively associated with homicides and robberies. Tracts with high-
er proportions of non-Hispanic black and Hispanic populations have higher
rates of homicide than tracts with lower proportions of non-Hispanic blacks or
Hispanics, but only percent non-Hispanic Black is positively associated with
robbery rates. Tracts with higher levels of immigrant concentration have signi?-
cantly lower levels of homicide than tracts with relatively lower levels of immi-
grant concentration. At the metro level, MSAs with larger populations had
higher robbery rates, but tracts in MSAs with greater percentages of males
between 15 and 34 had lower robbery rates. Tracts in Western MSAs had lower
levels of robbery than tracts in other regions.
Table 3 presents the coef?cients and standard errors for models similar to those
found in table 2, but adds the concentrations of traditional ?rearms dealers, pawn
shops, and big box retailers as predictor variables.5 Looking ?rst at model 1, the
association between FFLs and violent crime rates varies slightly across store type.
Speci?cally, the concentration of traditional dealers and pawn shops is signi?cantly
and positively associated with homicide rates. Tracts with twice the number of tra-
ditional ?rearms dealers per 10,000 residents have 7.94 percent [(e[.076] ? 1) * 100]
higher homicide rates, while tracts with twice the number of pawn shops per
10,000 residents have 9.9 percent [(e[.094] ? 1) * 100] higher homicide rates. Unlike
traditional dealers and pawn shops, the relationship between the presence of big
box stores that sell ?rearms and rates of neighborhood homicide is negative,
although this relationship is only marginally signi?cant. Tracts with twice the
number of big box stores that sell ?rearms per 10,000 residents have 10 percent
[(e[-.105] ? 1) * 100] lower homicide rates. Unlike homicides, there is a signi?cant
and positive association between all three store types and robbery. Tracts with twice
the number of traditional ?rearms dealers per 10,000 have 7.8 percent
[(e[.075] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery rates than other tracts, while similarly situated
pawn shops and big box stores have 18 percent [(e[.166] ? 1) * 100] and 21.2 per-
cent [(e[.193] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery rates, respectively.
We examined whether the effects of traditional dealers, pawn shops, and big
box retailers were different from one another using Wald tests. For neighborhood
homicide rates, the effects of traditional dealers and pawn shops are similar
(?2 = .094, p > .10), and both types of stores have signi?cantly stronger effects
than the concentration of big box retailers (?2 = 22.610, p < .05, and ?2 = 6.077,
p < .05, respectively). Pawn shops and big box retailers have stronger effects on
robbery rates than traditional dealers (?2 = 3.376, p < .05, and ?2 = 3.218,
p < .05, respectively), but there are no signi?cant differences between the effects
of pawn shops or big box stores (?2 = .090, p > .10) on robbery.
The association between neighborhood violent crime and the three types of
stores vary by social disorganization and residential instability. Turning to
model 2 in table 3, we observe a signi?cant and positive interaction between resi-
dential instability and traditional gun shops, but not pawn shops or big box
stores. At one standard deviation below mean residential instability, a 100 per-
cent difference in the number of traditional ?rearms dealers per 10,000 residents
is associated with less than half a percent [(e[.061+(?1*.064)] ? 1) * 100] difference
in homicide rates and a 5.6 percent [(e[.061+(?1*.035)] ? 1) * 100] difference in
robbery rates. However, a similar difference between two neighborhoods at one
standard deviation above mean residential instability is associated with a 13.26
percent [(e[.061+(1*.064)] ? 1) * 100] increase in expected homicide rates and a
10.1 percent [(e[.061+(1*.035)] ? 1) * 100] increase in expected robbery rates.
Results from model 3 in table 3 also suggest that different types of FFLs in?u-
ence homicides and robberies differently at varying levels of neighborhood dis-
advantage. Notably, the relationship between the concentration of pawn shops
with FFLs and violence is less pronounced in more disadvantaged neighbor-
hoods than in less disadvantaged neighborhoods. At one standard deviation
below mean neighborhood disadvantage, tracts with twice as many pawn shops
per 10,000 residents have 24.84 percent [(e[.132+(?1*?.090)] ? 1) * 100] higher
homicide rates and 29.94 [(e[.190+(?1*?.072)] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery rates
than other tracts. At one standard deviation above mean neighborhood disad-
vantage, a similar difference in the concentration of pawn shops is associated
with just 4.38 percent [(e[.132+(1*?.090)] ? 1) * 100] higher homicide rates and
12.57 [(e[.190+(1*?.072)] ? 1) * 100] higher robbery rates than other tracts.
Conversely, the association between traditional dealers and robberies is more
pronounced in highly disadvantaged areas. At one standard deviation below
mean neighborhood disadvantage, tracts with twice the number of traditional
?rearms dealers per 10,000 have 13.36 percent [(e[.068+(1*.057)] ? 1) * 100]
greater homicide rates and 27.4 percent [(e[.112+(1*.050)] ? 1) * 100] greater rob-
bery rates than similarly unstable tracts.
To summarize, the presence of gun shops in a neighborhood is associated
with higher rates of homicide and robbery. Moreover, we observe this positive
relationship whether considering all gun shops or different types of licensed ?re-
arms dealers. Finally, the relationship between FFLs and violence varies across
different neighborhood organizational contexts, particularly by levels of residen-
tial instability. To demonstrate this, ?gures 1 and 2 present predicted homicide
and robbery rates6 per 10,000 population, respectively, for stable neighbor-
hoods (?1 S.D. residential instability), average neighborhoods (mean residential
instability), and unstable neighborhoods (+1 S.D. residential instability).7
As ?gure 1 demonstrates, there is no relationship between the presence of
FFLs and homicide rates in relatively stable neighborhoods. For example, stable
neighborhoods without FFLs and those with 7 FFLs per 10,000 residents have
approximately 1.3 homicides per 10,000 residents. Unstable neighborhoods
with one gun shop per 10,000 residents have, on average, 1.33 homicides per
10,000 residents. Meanwhile, unstable neighborhoods with just two FFLs per
10,000 residents have, on average, 1.53 homicides per 10,000 residents, a signif-
icant difference of almost 15 percent.
Figure 2 shows that similar to homicides, the relationship between the pres-
ence of FFLs and robbery rates in relatively stable neighborhoods is small and
insigni?cant. However, unstable neighborhoods with just two FFLs per 10,000
residents have robbery rates (40.05 per 10,000 residents) that are, on average,
19.45 percent higher than unstable neighborhoods with no FFLs (34.28 per
10,000 residents).
In general, the patterns revealed by the models suggest that the presence of gun
shops is associated with higher rates of homicide and robbery in neighborhoods.
Furthermore, this relationship is more pronounced in neighborhoods character-
ized by high levels of residential instability, particularly for traditional ?rearms
dealers. In order to bolster these arguments, we run a series of supplemental
models to address two important concerns: the age of our data and potential
reverse causality.8 Our results and ?gures from these models are provided as
supplementary material on the Social Forces website.
Shifting opinions on ?rearms raise questions about the age of this data and its
current relevance. In 2000, when the NNCS was collected, Gallup polls indi-
cated that the majority of Americans (51 percent) felt that having guns in their
homes would make them less safe, but opinions have shifted, so that now 63
percent feel that having a gun in the home would make it safer (McCarthy
2014). Additionally, the majority of Americans (56 percent) now think that the
United States would be safer if more people carried concealed weapons
(Newport 2015). Although urban residents remain more skeptical of gun rights
than suburban or rural residents (Blocher 2013), temporal shifts in opinions on
?rearms could change the relationship between gun shops and crime, especially
given the role of perceptions in our theory.
To address this concern, we have added a more recent time point.
Unfortunately, there are no recent neighborhood crime datasets as large as the
NNCS. To our knowledge, the most recent large-scale data collection effort is
from a multi-city study on robberies and burglaries for the years 2006–20099
(Baumer et al. 2014). We replicate our models on a subsample of this more
recent data using tracts from metropolitan areas included in the NNCS, 2005
data from the FFLD, and the 2005–2009 American Community Survey to cap-
ture our social disorganization and control variables. We present results of these
models in tables S1 and S2. Notably, the coef?cients for total FFLs and by store
types are similar to those presented in table 3 from the NNCS and remain statis-
tically signi?cant. However, unlike models using NNCS data, the coef?cients for
interactions between FFLs and social disorganization variables are insigni?cant
in more recent data. While these results provide some evidence that attitudes
about ?rearms may be shifting somewhat, at least in neighborhoods with high
levels of residential instability, there is little to suggest that ?ndings using the
NNCS cannot be generalized to contemporary urban neighborhoods. Notably,
the “main effect” coef?cients remain sizeable and signi?cant in all models.
Additionally, as we discuss further in the conclusion, attitudes regarding ?re-
arms in urban areas—the focus of this study—remain negative. Finally, it is pos-
sible that the insigni?cant coef?cients observed for interaction terms in tables S1
and S2 could be a function of the smaller sample size or characteristics of the
more recent sample compared to the NNCS.
Another concern with cross-sectional analysis is reverse causality. Speci?cally,
the relationship between gun shops and violent crime could operate in the oppo-
site direction from what we hypothesize. In this case, gun shops could be viewed
as a reaction to homicides and/or robberies in a local area. Seeking self-
protection, residents of high-crime neighborhoods may demand or provide a
market for gun dealers. While it is impossible to rule this out of any cross-
sectional analysis, we provide conceptual and empirical evidence supporting our
argument that FFLs in?uence neighborhood violent crime, rather than crime
in?uencing the location of FFLs. Retail development often follows reductions in
crime (Stacy, Ho, and Pendall 2016), and high crime can stymie development in
urban areas, regardless of any stimulus programs that local governments may
put in place (Bowes 2007). It seems highly unlikely that FFLs would operate in a
different manner. Indeed, descriptive results presented in table 1 suggest that
crime rates are actually higher in neighborhoods without gun shops. To empiri-
cally address the possibility of reverse causality, we rerun models on a subset of
recent data from the multi-city study of neighborhood crime (Baumer et al.
2014) and include a lagged indicator of robbery from the NNCS and present the
results in table S3. If FFLs were opening as a result of neighborhood crime rates,
then robberies in 2000 should completely explain the relationship between FFLs
and robberies in 2006–2009. Although the coef?cient for our FFL variable is
noticeably smaller in table S3, it remains signi?cant and positive.
Discussion and Conclusion
Existing research has suggested that local institutions can directly and indirectly
in?uence crime rates. Routine activities theory suggests that institutions can
directly in?uence crime by providing suitable targets and by concentrating
potential victims, while social disorganization theory suggests that they can indi-
rectly in?uence crime by signaling disorganization in a neighborhood, which can
discourage social control efforts (Kubrin et al. 2011; Kubrin and Hipp 2014).
Our research adds to this discussion by considering federally licensed gun shops
as neighborhood institutions. We argue that along with providing opportunities
for crime, gun shops could signal disorder and indirectly contribute to crime
rates. To test this relationship, we employ multilevel Poisson models using data
from the NNCS, FFLD, and NETS. Results from these models suggest that there
is a relationship between gun shop presence and local crime rates in urban areas.
Speci?cally, our results indicate that homicide and robbery rates increase as
the number of gun shops in a neighborhood increases (weighted by the tract
population). This relationship remains even after accounting for other factors
associated with elevated crime rates at both the tract and metropolitan level. It
also holds regardless of shop type, with one exception. Big box stores with gun
licenses are not associated with higher homicide rates, though they are associ-
ated with higher robbery rates. A possible explanation for this is that big box
stores have differential effects on homicides and robberies. In short, the presence
of a department store or sporting goods store could provide suitable targets for
robbers, but not instill the same concerns about ?rearm presence that a tradi-
tional dealer or pawn shop might. Further research is needed on this issue. The
relationship between gun shops and crime appears to be entirely local. The effect
of metropolitan-level gun shop presence on local crime rates is insigni?cant. This
is consistent with our theory. We argue that gun shops foster crime directly by
providing opportunities for crime and indirectly most likely by changing percep-
tions of the neighborhood and instilling fear in residents that weakens social
control efforts. The direct effect should be highly localized—if institutions are at-
tracting crime because they provide a suitable target, the effect should not spread
far beyond those targets. Likewise, one would not expect the effect of changed
perceptions to spread far beyond the shop; a far-?ung dealer should not change
people’s perceptions of the local neighborhood. Additionally, residents are
unlikely to know how many shops exist in the metro, so metro-level shops
should not affect their perceptions of gun presence. This ?nding also provides
additional support for our theoretical claims. Existing research has shown that
gun shop presence is a viable indicator of ?rearm prevalence at higher levels of
aggregation, like urban counties (Wiebe et al. 2009). Given these ?ndings, me-
tros with more gun shops should have higher levels of ?rearm prevalence than
metros with fewer dealers. If crime results from increased gun presence, there
should be higher crime rates in tracts in cities with more gun shops. The fact that
we did not ?nd an association between local crime and metropolitan dealers sug-
gests that crime is not resulting from guns themselves, but from a process speci?c
to the shop, like the direct and indirect effects proposed above.
Despite our strong, signi?cant ?ndings, there are some limitations to this anal-
ysis. First, we focus solely on urban areas, which limits, to a certain extent, how
broadly these ?ndings can be applied. This is not necessarily a shortcoming. Our
hypothesized effects are most likely to occur in urban areas, given location-
speci?c differences in opinions about ?rearms. Urban residents are not only less
likely to own guns than suburban and rural residents, but are also more likely to
support gun control and to hold negative views about ?rearms in general
(Blocher 2013). Residents with such views are likely to be negatively in?uenced
by gun shop presence. In this case, context matters. Individuals assess their risk
of ?rearm violence based on culture and the everyday risks that they choose to
increases, were. Adding gun shops to these neighborhoods could interrupt social
control efforts and potentially trigger decline. It is plausible that selectively issu-
ing local licenses to gun shops could help stymie decline and increases in crime
in these fragile neighborhoods.
We close with this ?nal comment. Leaving gun shop interventions to the
neighborhood risks perpetuating inequality that already strati?es neighbor-
hoods, making it more likely that already-organized (and thus likely lower-
crime) neighborhoods will be successful, while disorganized neighborhoods will
fail and become even more disorganized. So, regardless of the policy strategy
pursued, efforts at limiting the effects of gun shop presence on neighborhood
crime that come from outside the neighborhood (i.e., government action) are
those with the greatest potential effect. Further research is needed to determine
policy interventions that are both feasible and effective.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at Social Forces online, http://sf.
oxfordjournals.org/.
About the Authors
Trent Steidley is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Sociology and
Criminology at the University of Denver. His research explores how social
movements, politics, and the criminal justice system interact to affect criminal
justice outcomes and policy, particularly with regard to ?rearms. His work has
David M. Ramey is an Assistant Professor of Sociology and Criminology at
the Pennsylvania State University. His research and teaching interests include
crime, deviance, and social control; community organization; and behavioral
health across the life-course.
Emily A. Shrider is a PhD candidate at Ohio State University. Her research
focuses on neighborhood and metropolitan decline, immigration in the Rust
Belt, the relationship between neighborhood structure and crime, and the effects
of segregation on health outcomes. She recently coauthored an article in the
