Title:
Racial Discrimination, Distress, Coping Motives, and Alcohol-Related
Problems Among U.S.-Born Asian American Young Adults
Abstract:
There is evidence that alcoholuse and problem drinking are increasing among AsianAmericans. This trend
appearstobesalientfor U.S.-bornAsianAmericans in particular. Somestudies suggest thatU.S.-born Asian
Americans engage in similar ratesof alcohol use compared to other racial groups. Therefore, it iscritical to
identify the mechanisms of risk and factors associated with alcohol-related problems among this health
disparities group. Racial discrimination is considered to be a highly stressful life experience and is
signi?cantly associated with alcohol use among ethnic minorities in general. We investigated the role of
psychologicaldistress and the drinking tocope motiveasunderlyingmediators betweenracialdiscrimination
and alcohol-related problems among 1,432 U.S.-born Asian American young adult college students from
Southern California. Asian American students reported high rates of psychologicaldistress and instancesof
racial discrimination. The ?nal structural equation modelprovided strong ?t to thedata, andthe variables in
themodel accounted for 44% ofthevariance inalcohol-related problems.Controllingfor alcohol use, Greek
fraternity and sorority status, and gender, racial discrimination was signi?cantly associated with alcohol-
related problems. Drinking to cope and psychological distress partially mediated the discrimination and
alcohol-relatedproblems association. Racialdiscrimination appearsto beanimportantriskfactor foralcohol-
related problems among Asian American young adults. This study was a novel investigation into how
psychological distress and drinking to cope mechanisms help explain and provide speci?city to the racial
discrimination and alcohol-related problems association among Asian Americans.
----------------------
Subtitles:

 Method
Participants and Procedures
 Measures
 Demographics
 Everyday Racial Discrimination (Williams et al., 1997)
 Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (Kessler et al., 2002)
 Drinking to Cope
 Quantity of Alcohol
 Rutgers Alcohol Problems Index (White & Labouvie, 1989)
 Data Analytic Plan
 Descriptive Data
 Measurement Model
 Structural Model
 Table 1


Text:
----------------------
College students have the highest prevalence of alcohol use
disorders relative to any other age group (Grucza et al., 2009).
National epidemiological studies suggest that over 40% of college
students who consume alcohol can be categorized as moderate
to heavy drinkers (Johnston et al., 2012). Given the numerous
alcohol-related problems associated with heavy alcohol use includ-
ing relationship problems, drinking and driving, and violence
(Hingson et al., 2017), it is essential to identify the determinants
and mechanisms that heighten alcohol-related problems among this
highest risk group. While the vast majority of studies have focused
on high-risk drinking among white American college students,
much less is known about the socially derived stressors and psy-
chosocial factors of drinking among ethnic/racial minority college
students, including Asian Americans.
Asian Americans represent the fastest-growing group in the
United States, yet this group is often overlooked in the alcohol
literature (Hahm et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2014). The “model minor-
ity” stereotype, or the notion that Asian Americans are ?nancially
well-off, highly educated, and psychologically well-adjusted, is
hypothesized tobe one reason whyAsian Americancollege students
remain underrepresented in studies investigating alcohol use among
this population. In addition, research studies that aggregate Asian
Americans as a whole often obscure signi?cant within-group differ-
encesin alcohol use among thisgroup (Iwamoto,Kaya,etal., 2016).
While national rates of alcohol use among Asian Americans as a
group are low, recent studies suggest that drinking patterns vary
signi?cantly among Asian Americans. High-risk drinking and
alcohol use disorders have signi?cantly increased among young
adult Asian Americans between 2001–2002 and 2012–2013 (Grant
et al., 2017). Other studies have identi?ed subgroups of Asian
American young adults who have comparable rates of heavy
drinking and alcohol-related problems compared to other racial
groups such as white Americans (Cook et al., 2013; Iwamoto
et al., 2010). Nativity or whether an individual was born in or
outside of the U.S., appears to be one important driver of within-
group differences in drinking patterns among this population (Cook
et al., 2015; Iwamoto et al., 2010). Asian Americans born in the
U.S. report higher alcohol consumption compared to foreign-born
Asians (Cook et al., 2013; Iwamoto, Grivel, et al., 2016 ; Lum et al.,
2009). Such differences in drinking behaviors across nativity can be
attributed to a complex process of acculturation that may in?uence
drinking behaviors (Lui & Zamboanga, 2018). Regardless, the
research is clear that the sociocultural experiences of those who
are U.S.- born are distinct from immigrants and aggregate data is
likely to mask not only prevalence but also obfuscate unique health
risk factors associated with nativity (Miller, 2010).
Racial discrimination is a frequent stressor experienced by Asian
American college students and may have especially damaging
consequences during this development period (Hall et al., 2015;
Tran & Sangalang, 2016). Comprehensive reviews highlight the
deleterious effects of racial discrimination on a wide range of health
outcomes,including alcohol misuse, psychological distress, depres-
sion, andphysical health problems (Pascoe & SmartRichman, 2009;
Williams & Mohammed, 2009). Yet, Asian Americans have been
underrepresented in empirical research on discrimination (Tran &
Sangalang, 2016) and even fewer studies have examined the
discrimination and drinking relationship among this group
(Gilbert & Zemore,2016). The paucityof studies that have included
racial discrimination has found a direct association between dis-
crimination and alcohol use and related problems among commu-
nity samples of Asian Americans (Chae et al., 2008; Gee et al.,
2007; Yoo et al., 2010). However, the relationship between racial
discrimination and alcohol use has been relatively untested among
U.S.-born Asian American college students despite reports of rising
discrimination against Asian Americans (Tessler et al., 2020). This
is a signi?cant gap in the literature as discrimination “gets under the
skin” heightening risk for alcohol-related problems (Hatzenbuehler,
2009; Hatzenbuehler et al., 2011).
Alcohol use may be driven by an individuals’ motivation and
efforts to escape or avoid feelings of distress (Baker et al., 2004;
Kenney et al, 2015). Negative reinforcement models suggest that if
individuals are overwhelmed by the distress they are experiencing,
these individuals may consume alcohol to alleviate this distress
(Solomon & Corbit, 1974). While, the positive relationship
between psychological distress and alcohol-related problems is
well-established (Merrill et al., 2014), the motive of drinking to
cope may be a more proximal predictor of alcohol-related problems
(Cooper et al., 2016; Rice & Van Arsdale, 2010). Speci?cally,
motivational models, suggest that distress is strongly associated
with drinking motives (Kenney et al., 2015). College students who
drink tocope with distress have beenfound to be at anincreased risk
of experiencing alcohol-related problems in comparison to those
who drink for reasons consistent with positive reinforcement
(e.g., social purposes or enhancement motives) even after controlling
for alcohol consumption (Cox et al.,2006).While several studies have
reported signi?cant associations between psychological distress and
alcohol use among Asian Americans (Cheng et al., 2012; Kim et al.,
2014), fewer have investigated the role of severe, unavoidable, and
uncontrollable stressors (such as, racism) that may confer risk for
elevated levels of alcohol-related problems (Chae et al., 2008).
The theoretical mechanisms of risk (i.e., drinking to cope)
between racial discrimination and alcohol-related problems among
white and ethnic/racial minority college students were ?rst tested by
Hatzenbuehler et al. (2011). Coping motives mediated the associa-
tion between discrimination and alcohol-related problems. The
study suggested that college students’ discrimination was indirectly
linked to alcohol-related problems through negative affect and
drinking to cope for both white and ethnic/racial minority students;
however, this study did not disaggregate ethnic/racial minority
groups. To our knowledge, there have been no studies that have
examined the degree to which racial discrimination has an indirect
effect on alcohol-related problems through multiple mechanisms of
risk including, psychological distress and drinking to cope, among
U.S.-born Asian Americans. One study examined how discrimina-
tion was indirectly associated withalcohol-relatedproblemsthrough
drinking to cope among underage (under the legal drinking age;
18-year olds) Asian American college students (Le & Iwamoto,
2019). While this study has been formative in advancing under-
standing regarding the important role of racial discrimination in
alcohol use, this study did not include psychological distress and
was conducted with a relatively small sample (i.e., N = 311) of
underage U.S.-born Asian American college students. To this end,
the degree to which racial discrimination may indirectly operate
through psychological distress which, in turn, may be associated
with drinking to cope and alcohol-related problems, is still
unknown. This gap is signi?cant as there is evidence to believe
that the indirect effect of racial discrimination on alcohol-related
problems may be stronger through psychological distress (Huynh
et al., 2014; Syed & Juan, 2012). Studying these distinct relation-
ships with a large sample of underage and legal-drinking age Asian
American young adults provides us with a broader understanding of
underlining mechanisms of risk with implications for informing
targeted interventions and programming with this group.
Based on the negative reinforcement and motivational theoretical
models and related empirical ?ndings (Cooper et al., 2016; Kenney
et al., 2015; Solomon & Corbit, 1974), we hypothesize that higher
reported levels of racial discrimination, distress, and drinking to
cope will be signi?cantly associated with alcohol-related problems.
Second, we test the degree to which discrimination may have an
indirect effect onalcohol-relatedproblemsthrough two mechanisms
of risk: Psychologicaldistress and drinking tocope.Wehypothesize
that discrimination will heighten distress, which will inturn relate to
drinking to cope with motives, which will result in more alcohol-
related problems.
Method
Participants and Procedures
The current study draws upon unique secondary data that has not
been published from the larger study (author). Participants in the
current study were 1,432 Asian American undergraduates from a
large public university located in southern California. Chinese
Americans consisted of the largest ethnic group (32.1%), followed
by Vietnamese Americans (17.5%), Filipino Americans (14.6%),
Korean Americans (11.5%),Other Asian ethnicity (e.g., Taiwanese,
Hmong, Cambodian; 9.1%), Indian American (8.1%), and Japanese
American (7.1%). The average age of the participants was
19.81 years (SD = 1.36; age range 18–24), and 29.2% identi?ed
as seniors, 27.1% as juniors, 21.7% as sophomores, and 22% as
freshmen. The sample was predominantly women (73.2%), and
23.3% were involved in a Greek sorority/fraternity. The percentage
of ethnic groups represented in the current sample was re?ective
of the university’s Asian ethnic group demographic makeup. The
institutional review board approved all procedures in the study.
Participants were recruited using an online forum through which
students from all majors (e.g., psychology, engineering, chemistry,
social ecology, and humanities) can participate in experiments for
extra credit. In order to participate in the study, participants had to
identify as Asian American and born in the U.S.
Measures
Demographics
The demographics section assessed age, ethnicity, nativity
(e.g., yourself or your sibling were the ?rst born in the United
States), and Greek af?liation (e.g., fraternity or sorority).
Everyday Racial Discrimination (Williams et al., 1997)
The Everyday Racial Discrimination (ERD) measure is widely
used and assessesthe frequencyofunfair treatmentin theday-to-day
lives of participants due to race/ethnicity. The stem of the items
includes, “Based on your race”: Being treated with less courtesy
than others; being treated with less respect than others; receiving
poorer service than others in restaurants or stores; and people acting
as if you are not smart. The scale has a total of nine items that
measure the frequency of such experiences. Each item is rated on a
day. The scale has been validated and used in epidemiological
studies with Asian American community samples (Gee et al., 2007,
2009). An overall composite score for the racial discrimination
measures was calculated by summing participants’ responses on the
nine items. The reliability estimate for the racial discrimination
measure in the current study was ? = .90.
Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (Kessler et al., 2002)
The Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K-10) is a widely used
and well-validated measure of distress caused by anxiety and
depressive feelings. All items are answered in the context of
how a participant felt in the past 30 days. Sample items include,
“ ::: about how often did you feel tired for no good reason?” or
“ : : : how often did you feel nervous?” Responses options are on a
5-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (none of the time) to 5 (all
of the time). Scores for the K-10 were assessed by summing the
responses for each individual, with a possible score range 10–50.
Scores falling between 20 and 24 indicate “mild mental disorder,”
scores between 25 and 29 indicate potential for “moderate mental
disorder,” and scores above 30 suggest the likelihood of a “severe
mental disorder” (Kessler et al., 2002). Convergent validity evi-
dence for the K10 clinical cut-off scores was demonstrated through
signi?cant correlations with serious mental illness and Diagnostic
Statistic Manual disorders (Kessler et al., 2002, 2003, 2010;
Spies et al., 2009). The present study’s reliability estimate for the
K-10 was ? = .91.
Drinking to Cope
The ?ve-item drinking to cope motives scale is from the Coping
and Enhancement Motives scale developed byCooper (1994) and is
the most widely used coping motives measure (Kuntsche et al.,
2005). This scale assesses the degree to which an individual uses
alcohol to “escape, avoid, or otherwise regulate negative emotions”
(Cooper et al., 1995,p.991). A sample item includes “How often do
you drink to forget your worries?” It has a total of four items and is
scored on a 6-point Likert scale that ranges from 1 (almost never/
never) to 5 (almost always/always). All ?ve items are summed up
to provide an overall composite score of drinking to cope. Internal
consistency for the drinking to cope measure in this current study
was ? = .92.
Quantity of Alcohol
Quantity was assessed by summing the number of drinks con-
sumed on an average week in the past 3 months. Participants were
asked to approximate their typical alcohol consumption for each day
of the week over the past 90 days, similar to the gold-standard
Timeline Followback interview assessment (Sobell & Sobell, 1992).
Rutgers Alcohol Problems Index (White & Labouvie, 1989)
The Rutgers Alcohol Problems Index (RAPI) examines the
frequency at which an individual experienced alcohol-related pro-
blems or negative consequences while or because of drinking over
the past year. Thiswell-validated instrument assessesthe occurrence
of a total of 23 negative consequences and response optionsare on a
5-point Likert scale: 0 (never) to 4(10 or more times). Sample items
include “Not able to work or study for a test” and “Missed out on
other things because you spend too much money on alcohol.” The
current study used the three distinct subscales on the RAPI derived
by Martens and colleagues (Martens et al., 2007, 2008) which were
labeled Abuse/Dependence (12 items), Individual Consequences
(seven items), and Social Consequences (four items). Scores for the
RAPI subscales were derived by summing the responses for each
individual based on the subscale. The subscales were used as
indicators/parcels of the latent factor of alcohol-related problems.
The internal consistency estimate of the three subscales was
? = .87, .84, .82 for Abuse/Dependence, Individual Consequences,
and Social Consequences, respectively.
Data Analytic Plan
Structural equation modeling (SEM) was the primary data
analytic approach used in the current study. SEM was performed
using Mplus 7 (Muthen & Muthen, 2012). SEM can test and model
complex patterns of relationships between latent factors, while
simultaneously test multiple mediators and outcome variables.Based
on the procedures outlined by Matsunaga (2008), we created item
parcels as indicators of latent variables (racial discrimination and
psychological distress). Individual items from the discrimination and
K10 measures were ranked ordered by factor loadings, and three
parcels were created for each factor. There are several advantages of
creating item parcels. Item parcels generally have higher reliability
estimates than single items thus reducing measurement error and
result in better ?tting models (Coffman & MacCallum, 2005).
Findings from simulation studies suggest that item parcels reduce
the number of parameters in the model thus signi?cantly reducing
parameter bias (Bandalos, 2002; Rhemtulla, 2016). Item parceling
also increases the power to detect model misspeci?cation and
provides more accurate parameter estimates. Since the con?rmatory
factor analyses (CFA) measurement model of the drinking to cope
motive is well-documented (Gilson et al., 2013; Nehlin & Öster,
2019), we used all the observed indicators for the drinking to cope
measure. Following Martens et al. (2007) recommendations, the
alcohol-related problems latent factor was created using alcohol
abuse, personal problems, and social problems subscales. The com-
parative ?t index (CFI), Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and root mean
square errorofapproximation(RMSEA) were used toassessthe ?t of
the measurement and structural models. Conventional standards
suggest that CFI and TLIvalues greater than .95 and RMSEAvalues
of .05 indicate near model-to-data ?t (Hu & Bentler, 1999), with
RMSEA values of .08 suggesting fair ?t (Brown & Cudeck, 1993).
Full information maximum likelihood (FIML) procedures were used
to handle missing data. FIML procedures do not input databut rather
through Expectation-maximization (EM) procedure, estimates the
standards and parameters in the model (Enders, 2001). To test for
mediation, the bootstrap bias-corrected standard errors were per-
formed using 1,000 bootstraps (Mallinckrodt et al., 2006).
Descriptive Data
Descriptive statistics were conducted and the average distress
score was 21.96 (SD = 7.25), which indicates that, on average,
the scores fall within the clinical range (e.g., scores between 20 and
24 indicate a mild disorder; Kessler et al., 2002, 2003, 2010).
Thirty-percent of the sample scored 25 or higher, indicating high
probability of detecting a moderate to severe mental illness. All the
participants reported at least one incident of racial discrimination
(e.g., participants reported on at least one item of the measure that
they experienced racial discrimination), and 59% reported at least
two incidents of racial discrimination (e.g., participants endorsed
at least two items on the measure). The correlation analysis revealed
that racial discrimination was positively associated with psycho-
logical distress (r = .41, p < .001), drinking to cope (r = .20,
p < .001), and alcohol-related problems (r = .22, p < .001).
Psychological distress was positively related to drinking to cope
(r = .29, p < .001) and alcohol-related problems (r = .25,
p < .001), and drinking to cope was related to alcohol-related
problems (r = .62, p < .001).
Measurement Model
The latent constructs in the measurement model, included
discrimination, psychological distress, drinking to cope, and
alcohol-related problems, were allowed to covary and provided
adequate ?t to the data ?2(71) = 281.69, p < .001, CFI = .99,
TLI = .98, and RMSEA = .046.
Structural Model
We tested the structural model with all the observed variables
(the covariates, alcohol consumption, and Greek status) included in
the model, which resulted in the structural model offering a good ?t
to the data, ?2(133) = 15,375, p < .001, CFI = .96, TLI = .95 and
RMSEA = .062 (CI = .057–.066). The signi?cant pathways
between factors and the R-square for psychological distress,
drinking to cope, and alcohol-related problems latent factors are
reported in Figure 1. Racial discrimination was signi?cantly
associated with higher psychological distress (? = .45, p < .001)
and psychological distress was positively related to drinking to
cope (? = .32, p < .001). Controlling for alcohol consumption
(? = .32, p < .001), Greek status (? = .08, p < .001), and gender
(? = .05, p = .07), higher reports of racial discrimination (? = .08,
p < .001), psychological distress (? = .06, p < .05), and drinking
to cope (? = .51, p < .001), were positively associated with more
alcohol-related problems (results are displayed in Figure 1). The
bootstrap bias-corrected standard errors, which included 1,000
bootstrapped samples tests of indirect effects, detected two indirect
effects: (a) racial discrimination (.073, p < .001, 95% CI [.054,
.093]) had an indirect effect on alcohol-related problems through
psychological distress and drinking to cope, and (b) racial discrimi-
nation had an indirect effect on alcohol-related problems through
psychological distress (.03, p < .05, 95% CI [.0005, .053]). See
Table 1.
Asian Americans experience frequent racial discrimination yet
there has been limited research that has investigated its relationship
to alcohol-related problems. This gap in the literature has persisted
despite advances in our knowledge about the mediated associations
between racial discrimination and alcohol outcomes (Gilbert &
Zemore, 2016). The present study signi?cantly advances the scant
literature in this area by ?rst, highlighting the direct and indirect
associations between racial discrimination and alcohol-related
problems, andsecond,identifying psychological distressand drink-
ing to cope as potential mechanisms of risk. Meaningfully, results
reveal that all participants reported experiencing racial discrimina-
tion and over 30% scored in the clinical range on the K10 (Kessler
et al., 2003).
Controlling for well-established covariates of problematic alcohol
use among college students including, Greek status (Borsari et al.,
2007), quantity of alcohol consumption and gender, racial discrimi-
nation was found to be directly associated with alcohol-related
problems. The direct effects of discrimination on alcohol use and
alcohol-related problems are consistent with previous studies
with community samples of Asian Americans (Chae et al., 2008;
Gee et al., 2007; Yoo et al., 2010). The second hypothesis was
supported as well, wherein racial discrimination had an indirect
relationship on alcohol-related problems through psychological
distress and the drinking to cope motive. Current results are
consistent with Hatzenbuehler et al.’s (2011) ?ndings with white
and ethnic minority college students.
Racial discrimination is one particularly distinct source of stress
that has been posited to be associated with psychological distress,
and distress has been found to mediate the association between
stress and alcohol use (Bujarski & Ray, 2014). Asian American
college students in our study who experienced relatively higher
frequencies of racial discrimination were more likely to report
more distress and experience greater alcohol-related problems.
Based on motivational models (Cooper et al., 2016), it is plausi-
ble that racial discrimination heightens psychological distress,
thus, these individuals may engage in problematic alcohol use to
cope with and regulate their distress due to discrimination.
Findings add to growing evidence regarding the distinct and
toxic role of racial discrimination on psychological distress and
alcohol-related problems
Due to limitations attributable tothe cross-sectional design of this
study, it is dif?cult to de?nitively conclude the temporal direction
and in?uence among the variables in the model (Maxwell & Cole,
2007). Alongitudinal design would be better suited to prospectively
investigate the prognosis of alcohol-related problems and more
accurately approximate the indirect effects of racial discrimination.
While previous studies have suggested differences in drinking rate
between Asian ethnic groups, we were unable to examine ethnic
group differences due to unequal sizes of Asian American ethnic
subgroups in our sample. In addition, although we controlled for
gender, this sample has a disproportionate ratio of women to men
Table 1
which isa common phenomenon in research conducted withcollege
students (Lui & Zamboanga, 2018). To this end, future studies
should consider having a more balanced sample, including larger
and more Asian American ethnic groups (e.g., Filipino, Korean,
South Asian Americans), and examine gender-relevant factors and
differences across ethnic groups in relation to alcohol outcomes.
Cultural orientation and alcohol beliefs may also be other salient
factors to examine across Asian ethnic groups and alcohol use (Lui
et al., 2020). Although there is strong evidence for the use of the
Everyday Discrimination Scale with Asian Americans, a culturally
speci?c measure such as the Subtle and Blatant Racism Scale might
provide a more nuanced understanding of the speci?c types racism
experienced by Asian Americans (Yoo, Steger, & Lee, 2010).
Despite these limitations, there are a few notable strengths of the
present study. First, the large sample size of U.S.-born Asian
American college students provided the opportunity to examine
the associations of interest in this underrepresented population.
Additionally, this study builds upon previous investigations
into the discrimination-alcohol problem relationship by testing
the in?uence of two theoretically important mechanisms of risk,
includingdrinkingmotive anddistress. Despitetheselimitations,the
current study provides greater speci?city regarding the distinct
pathways through which discrimination “gets under the skin”
(Hatzenbuehler, 2009) and confers risk for the development of
alcohol-related problems for an underrepresented and overlooked
group in the alcohol literature, U.S.-born Asian Americans. These
?ndings bear signi?cant clinical implications, particularly in con-
sideration of the high prevalence of psychological distress and
racial discrimination among our sample. Counter to assumptions
based on the model minority stereotype, 30% of Asian Americans
sampled scored within the “moderate to severe mental disorder”
range on the psychological distress measure (Kessler et al., 2003,
2010). This ?nding highlights the high clinical levels of severe
distress often overlooked among Asian Americans. All of the Asian
Americans in the sample reported experiencing racism and 59%
reported experiencing two incidents of racism. These ?ndings
highlight that, counter to the “model minority” myth, this group
is not protected from experiences of racial discrimination. Consid-
ering that racial discrimination seems pertinent to problematic
drinking among this sample, it is important to assess, address,
and validate the client’s racial discrimination experiences in clini-
cal practice. In addition, as Asian Americans are often clinically
overlooked with respect to alcohol use disorders (Cheng et al.,
2018), efforts to increase assessment are critical to ensure appro-
priate intervention and treatment. Clinically targeting the relevant
mechanismsof risk (e.g., psychological distress and the drinking to
cope motive) and providing alternative active coping strategies
might also be facilitative in the reduction of alcohol-related pro-
blems. Finally, the toxic impact of racial discrimination on the
health of Asian Americans must be addressed. Public health
campaignsthat help change public perceptionregarding the “model
minority” myth could be one critical way to move past its deleteri-
ous impact. Psychologists should also work with Asian American
antiracist activists to think through and develop antiracism college
programming for Asian American students with the goal of mini-
mizing the corrosive impact of racism on distress and alcohol-
related problems.
