Title:
Medical Immunol
Abstract:
Conventional vaccines afford protection against infectious diseases by expanding existing pathogen-
specific peripheral lymphocytes, both CD8 cytotoxic effector (CTL) and CD4 helper T cells. The
latter induce B cell maturation and antibody production. As a consequence, lymphocytes within the
memory pool are poised to rapidly proliferate at the time of a subsequent infection. The "thymic
vaccination" concept offers a novel way to alter the primary T cell repertoire through exposure of
thymocytes to altered peptide ligands (APL) with reduced T cell receptor (TCR) affinity relative to
cognate antigens recognized by those same TCRs. Thymocyte maturation (i.e. positive selection)
is enhanced by low affinity interaction between a TCR and an MHC-bound peptide in the thymus
and subsequent emigration of mature cells into the peripheral T lymphocyte pool follows. In
principal, such variants of antigens derived from infectious agents could be utilized for peptide-
driven maturation of thymocytes bearing pathogen-specific TCRs. To test this idea, APLs of gp33–
41,  a  Db-restricted  peptide  derived  from  the  lymphocytic  choriomeningitis  virus  (LCMV)
glycoprotein, and of VSV8,  a  Kb-restricted peptide from the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)
nucleoprotein, have been designed and their influence on thymic maturation of specific TCR-
bearing transgenic thymocytes examined in vivo using irradiation chimeras. Injection of APL resulted
in positive selection of CD8 T cells expressing the relevant viral specificity and in the export of
those virus-specific CTL to lymph nodes without inducing T cell proliferation. Thus, exogenous
APL administration offers the potential of expanding repertoires in vivo in a manner useful to the
organism.  To  efficiently  peripheralize  antigen-specific  T  cells,  concomitant  enhancement  of
mechanisms promoting thymocyte migration appears to be required. This commentary describes
the rationale for thymic vaccination and addresses the potential prophylactic and therapeutic
applications of this approach for treatment of infectious diseases and cancer. Thymic vaccination-
induced peptide-specific T cells might generate effective immune protection against disease-causing
agents, including those for which no effective natural protection exists.
----------------------
Subtitles:
 New approaches to eliciting pro
repertoire manipulation: the co
 Masha Fridkis-Hareli1,2 and Ellis L Re
 Introduction
 Conclusions
 List of abbreviations
 Competing interests
 Authors' contributions


Text:
----------------------
New approaches to eliciting pro
repertoire manipulation: the co
Masha Fridkis-Hareli1,2 and Ellis L Re
Introduction
Vaccination has improved healthcare by providing the
most cost effective means to prevent disease on a global
basis [1,2]. Since the first safe vaccine against smallpox
effective [2]. The traditional approach to vaccine develop-
ment from the early 1950's until today has been based
most commonly on administration of weakened versions
of disease-causing agents or certain of their components
with appropriate adjuvants. In this way, successful vac-
cines against key viruses that cause acute infectious dis-
eases of childhood (e.g. poliovirus, measles virus,
mumps, rubella, chicken pox, etc.) have been developed.
These vaccines induce peripheral T and B lymphocyte
memory responses, affording protection against any
future attack by disease-causing agents should it occur.
To date, the fundamental principles of vaccination have
remained unchanged. The overriding concept for each
vaccine has been the establishment of protective immu-
nity largely due to antigen-specific T cell expansion, facil-
itating subsequent proliferation and differentiation of
CD8 cytotoxic effector T cells and CD4 helper T cells capa-
ble of producing antiviral cytokines and chemokines (Fig.
1A). CD4 T cells activate B cells to generate neutralizing
antibodies, offering protection against viral attachment/
translocation or bacterial toxins, etc. [4,5]. As neutralizing
antibodies have been the subject of recent reviews [6-9],
they will not be considered further here.
However, conventional vaccines have their pitfalls. Micro-
organisms including HIV and malaria, among others, may
alter their antigenic proteins through rapid mutagenesis,
thereby hindering cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-based
immunity, exploiting holes in the T cell repertoire, and/or
misdirecting both cellular and humoral responses away
from key cell-binding receptors to pathogen components
which cannot provide epitopes for neutralizing antibod-
ies [10-13].
The fundamental ways in which the immune system rec-
ognizes and responds to antigen are identical, irrespective
of the source of molecules; microbes, allografts, allergens,
autoantigens, or tumor antigens are approached in a sim-
ilar manner. It follows that immune-based therapies that
focus on promoting the quantity and quality of the
immune response should be beneficial in the treatment of
a range of diseases, especially persistent viral infections
and cancer. Finding ways to increase the pool of mature,
primed T cells that are able to fend off disease is a goal for
future vaccine development. In this respect, a novel strat-
egy for vaccine design, termed "thymic vaccination" has
been considered to alter the T cell antigen receptor reper-
toire centrally via altered peptide ligands (APL). APL
derived from infectious agents or tumor antigens, with
low affinity to the TCR could, in principle, mediate posi-
tive selection and export of specific T cells from the thy-
mus [14]. As such, these APL might be candidates for
manipulating the thymic repertoire in vivo, controlling the
generation of naive T cells and hence, subsequent mem-
ory development within the peripheral lymphoid com-
partment. Through repertoire manipulation, it should be
possible to sculpt the specificity and diversity of disease-
fighting cells. This thymic vaccination approach aims to
deliver, by parenteral administration, positively selecting
APL of cognate antigens into the thymus, eliciting matura-
tion of thymocytes with desired TCR specificities at the
level of thymic repertoire development (Fig. 1B). Note
how engendering T cells with anti-viral specificity requires
administration of an APL, a weaker affinity ligand for a
given TCR to encourage maturation and emigration from
the thymus.
Expanding T cell repertoires has enormous potential in
aiding the organism's fight against infections or in afford-
ing tumor immunity. This strategy is principally different
from conventional "peripheral" vaccination, which leads
to proliferation of pre-existing mature T cells but does not
alter the repertoire through creation of T lymphocytes
with new T cell specificities. Thymic vaccination, by con-
trast, will alter the thymic repertoire to create desired T cell
specificities. Moreover, a key feature of thymic vaccination
is that it should be capable of directing the immune
response towards those non-mutable components of pro-
teins derived from infectious agents and tumors and away
from misguiding cues that are part of pathogen or cancer
chicanery. The rationale for this approach and the advan-
tages over traditional vaccines are described below.
T cells bearing a highly diverse ?? T cell receptor (TCR)
repertoire develop in the thymus from stem cells originat-
ing in the hemopoietic tissues [15-17]. On entering the
thymus through the cortico-medullary junction, these
cells migrate to the subcapsular epithelium and undergo a
complex differentiation process in the thymic cortex and
then in the medulla, involving proliferation, expression of
accessory molecules, rearrangement of TCR genes and
selection of the TCR repertoire (reviewed in [18,19]). T
cell development does not occur autonomously but
requires signals from non-hematopoietic stromal cells
including various types of thymic epithelial cells (TECs)
which show profound phenotypic differences between
cortex and medulla. The thymic epithelium provides a
broad spectrum of signals for thymocyte proliferation, dif-
ferentiation and selection. Thymic nurse cells, expressing
high levels of MHC class I and II molecules and also con-
taining antigen processing machinery, are involved in thy-
mocyte selection, mediated by peptide/MHC (pMHC)
ligands. Pools of self-peptides bound to MHC molecules
control both positive and negative selection (reviewed in
[20]). Thymocytes that carry TCRs having low-affinity
interactions with MHC-bound self-peptides are positively
selected, and are exported into the pool of mature
FGiegnuerrea l2scheme of thymocyte selection and emigration to th
General scheme of thymocyte selection and emigration to th
expressing pre-TCR undergo divisions and become ??TCR+
presented by class I and II MHC molecules expressed on thy
high affinity to pMHC undergo apoptosis, while those bound 
restricted CD8+ SP or class II-restricted CD4+ SP cells. Thes
ferent egress-related mechanisms.
peripheral lymphocytes. In contrast, thymocytes bearing
those TCRs that recognize self-peptides with "high" affin-
ity are eliminated primarily upon interaction with den-
dritic cells [19,21]. A schematic representation of
thymocyte development [DN (CD4-CD8- double nega-
tive) ? DP (CD4+CD8+ double positive ? SP (CD4+CD8-
, CD4-CD8+ single positive)] is depicted in Fig. 2.
The avidity of pMHC/TCR interactions plays a major role
in T cell recognition [14]. Crystal structure analyses have
revealed fine details about peptide conformation inside
the peptide binding groove of MHC molecules and the
amino acid residues interacting with the TCR V? and V?
domains including their CDR3 loops [22-25]. Peptide
analogs of antigenic peptides with substitutes at amino
acid residues, APL, have been shown to generate qualita-
tively different T cell responses compared with those pro-
duced by the antigenic peptides themselves [26]. Some
APL act as TCR antagonists capable of positively selecting
peripheral lymphoid compartment
 peripheral lymphoid compartment. CD4-CD8- (DN) cells 
D4+CD8+ (DP) at which stage they interact with self-peptides 
ic stromal cells. Those thymocytes whose TCRs interact with 
o pMHC with low affinity mature to become MHC class I-
 mature thymocytes then emigrate to the periphery aided by dif-
nucleoprotein peptide of the influenza virus NP366–379 in
the context of H-2Db, a peptide antagonist mediates posi-
tive selection in FTOC [35,36], whereas the cognate pep-
tide itself leads to deletion of DP thymocytes [37].
Design and initial characterization of APL derived from the viral 
epitopes gp33–41 and VSV8
To experimentally test the concept of thymic vaccination,
we have designed variants of gp33–41 and VSV8 peptides
with substitutions at residues interacting with the TCR
aimed at reducing TCR-pMHC affinity via diminution of
the number of atomic contacts between the peptide and
the TCR. Subsequently, we examined the effects of these
APL on thymocyte maturation and emigration in vivo in
two well-defined TCR-transgenic mouse systems. In the
case of gp33–41 cognate peptide, amino acids at the peptide
positions p4 (Tyr, Y) and p6 (Phe, F) were modified to Ser
(S) and Ala (A), respectively, based on the crystal structure
of the gp33–41/H-2Db complex showing exposure of the
side chains of these amino acid residues to the solvent and
hence, TCR accessibility [38,39]. No change was made in
the peptide anchor residues that occupy the binding pock-
ets of H-2Db, thus ensuring proper peptide presentation
in the context of MHC. In the other less extreme peptide
variant of gp33–41, Ala (A) at p7 was substituted with Glu
(E). For the VSV8 peptide, the weak L4 agonist with the
substitution of Leu (L) for Val (V) at the p4 peptide resi-
due has been employed. The crystal structure of the N15
TCR-VSV8/Kb complex as well as the space-filling models
of Kb in complex with VSV8 and L4 peptides are shown in
Fig. 3. The centrally positioned p4 peptide residue, whose
atoms are shown in green in the space-filling model, faces
up to the solvent and interacts with the N15 TCR. In spite
of the subtle differences in the structure of VSV8/Kb as
compared to L4/Kb, these focal changes (p4 and Lys 66 on
the ?1 helix of H-2Kb) determine the outcome of thymic
selection [31]. In a similar way, Db/ gp33–41 vs. APL in
which amino acid residues at p4 and p6 are altered, differ-
entially affect development of thymocytes expressing the
P14 TCR (data not shown). Experimental data using these
APL (Y4S/F6A and A7E) for studies of thymocyte selection
and emigration as applied to the thymic vaccination
approach are summarized below (for the original work,
see [40]).
The binding of the APL to the MHC class I molecules
using RMA-S cells confirmed that amino acid substitu-
tions at peptide residues interacting with the TCR did not
affect peptide binding and, by extension, peptide presen-
tation to T cells. A series of experiments was next per-
formed to evaluate the functional potential of the APL to
stimulate peripheral T cells in mice injected with the vari-
ant peptides. Results of both proliferation and cytokine
secretion assays using mature T cells from P14Rag2-/-
lymph node and spleen showed a response to the high
TCR affinity cognate peptide gp33–41, but not to the Y4S/
F6A variant peptide. In support of this observation,
tetramers of H-2Db in complex with the Y4S/F6A peptide
did not bind to SP CD8 thymocytes from P14 Rag2-/- mice
at any tetramer dilution, as judged by immunofluores-
cence analysis, whereas high fluorescence intensity stain-
ing was detected using tetramers of H-2Db in complex
with the gp33–41 peptide. The A7E/H-2Db tetramer gave
intermediate staining. These data suggested that the Y4S/
F6A mutant must interact with the P14 TCR with
extremely weak affinity, if at all.
Effect of APL administration on thymocyte development in vivo
Injection of the cognate viral peptides gp33–41 and VSV8
leads to negative selection of P14- and N15TCR-bearing
thymocytes, respectively, due to relatively high affinity
pMHC/TCR interactions [31,34]. In vivo administration of
P14Rag2-/- mice and VSV8 injection into
N15Rag2-/- mice resulted in pronounced depletion of DP
thymocytes. Surprisingly, injection of P14 Rag2-/- mice
with the Y4S/F6A peptide mutant resulted in a significant
increase in the total number of thymocytes as well as the
DP thymocyte subpopulation, while the A7E variant had
no effect on thymocyte counts. As with Y4S/F6A in the
P14Rag2-/- system, injection of L4 in the N15Rag2-/-
mouse preserved the DP thymocytes and led to an
increase in total thymocyte counts. The unusual increase
in the number of DP thymocytes following exposure to
Y4S/F6A peptide was not due to cellular proliferation and
attendant DNA synthesis as examined by in vivo BrdU
incorporation assay. Rather, Y4S/F6A peptide administra-
tion prevented apoptosis as confirmed by staining of thy-
mocytes with anti-Annexin V mAb. To more directly test
this hypothesis, we injected P14 Rag2-/- mice with mix-
tures of the negatively selecting cognate peptide gp33–41
plus the Y4S/F6A APL. Increasing the amount of Y4S/F6A
peptide in the injection mixture resulted in a higher
number of total and DP thymocytes. Thus, we infer that
the Y4S/F6A variant may compete with other endogenous
negatively-selecting peptides for binding to H-2Db mole-
cules expressed on thymic stroma either by binding to
"empty" surface MHC class I molecules or, perhaps, by a
cross-presentation mechanism [41]. That A7E fails to
afford positive selection and interacts significantly with
the P14 TCR in Db/A7E tetramer binding assays suggest
that this APL does not reduce TCR binding affinity suffi-
ciently to stimulate positive selection.
Y4S/F6A and L4 peptides mediate positive selection and emigration 
of thymocytes in irradiation chimeras
The numerically small population of antigen-specific
recent thymic emigrants (RTE) makes thymic selection/
Ftirguucrtu 3al basis of APL design
Structural basis of APL design. Crystal structure of N15 TCR
CRIPT [58]. The TCR ? chain is shown in gold, the TCR ? ch
in green with the arrow pointing to the p4 valine side chain. 
its L4 variant (right panel) [31]. The Kb is shown as a GRASP 
due atoms in green.
emigration studies difficult even with the use of TCR
transgenic mice. To resolve this issue, we employed irradi-
ation chimeras of congenic mouse strains (expressing the
CD45.1 marker in B6 and CD45.2 in P14 and N15 trans-
genic mice) to determine whether interactions between
the low affinity ligands, Y4S/F6A and L4, and their specific
TCRs would result in thymic positive selection and subse-
quent emigration from the thymus. For this purpose, lin-
eage-minus BM precursors of P14 – or N15- TCR
transgenic Rag2-/- mice (donor) were injected into irradi-
ated congenic B6 mice (recipient) and the development of
donor-type cells was monitored weekly by immunofluo-
rescence staining and multicolor FACS analysis [40]. Fol-
VSV8/Kb (left panel) [57]. The figure was rendered in MOLS-
in in blue, Kb in magenta and ?2M in red. Note the VSV8 peptide 
pace-filling models of Kb in complex with VSV8 peptide and with 
urface [59] in magenta with peptide in CPK format and p4 resi-
both DP and SP CD8 donor thymocytes were highest,
consistent with positive selection. In contrast, injection of
either gp33–41 or VSV8 cognate viral peptides into irradia-
tion chimeras led to thymocyte depletion by negative
selection. Analysis of the peripheral lymphoid organs in
these chimeras by triple color immunofluorescence with
anti-CD45.2, anti-CD8? and anti-TCR-specific mAbs
showed the greatest number of donor-type
CD45.2+CD8+V?2+ T cells in the lymph nodes of Y4S/F6A
-injected chimeras (2–3 fold over PBS-injected control
mice), suggesting that donor-type thymocytes expressing
the P14 TCR had developed in the presence of Y4S/F6A,
matured and emigrated to the lymph nodes. A similar
increase in the donor cell numbers were observed up to 9
weeks after injection of Y4S/F6A peptide. Positive selec-
tion was also evident in N15 Rag2-/- -B6 irradiation chime-
ras injected with the L4 variant. In this case, higher
CD8+V?5.2+ N15 TCR transgene donor-type T cell num-
bers were observed both in lymph nodes and spleens. The
functional analysis of donor-type CD8+ lymph node T
cells in irradiation chimeras injected with the positively
selecting Y4S/F6A or L4 peptides showed approximately
two-fold higher proliferation levels in response to the cog-
nate peptides gp33–41 and VSV8, respectively, in vitro, com-
pared to cells from PBS control-injected chimeric mice,
reflecting the two-fold difference in the number of donor-
type CD8+ T cells in lymph nodes of chimeras injected
with the APL. However, importantly, these mature donor-
type T cells did not proliferate in response to Y4S/F6A or
L4 variant peptides in vivo. Injection of the viral peptides
and their APLs in vivo led to reduction of CFSE+ staining in
the case of gp33–41 and VSV8, suggestive of proliferation
and/or activation-induced cell death (AICD). In contrast,
no change in CFSE+ staining was observed upon injection
of Y4S/F6A or L4 peptides, implying that these APLs do
not facilitate T cell expansion per se. In sum, the cognate
peptide ligands gp33–41 and VSV8 which interact with the
TCR with relatively high affinity compared to their respec-
tive APL, induce activation of peripheral T cells, whereas
peptide variants Y4S/F6A and L4, which bind TCR with
low affinity and mediate positive selection, do not stimu-
late mature T cell divisions.
The data described above and previously [40] represent
the first examination of the direct effects of amino acid
substitutions at the P14 and N15 TCR contact residues on
thymocyte selection and emigration in vivo. In addition,
we show that thymocyte emigration is dependent on the
affinity/avidity of pMHC/TCR interactions. These results
suggest that although the low affinity pMHC/TCR interac-
tions are insufficient to trigger cell divisions in mature
cells, differentiation of immature thymocytes nevertheless
follows. Affinity measurements support the idea that pos-
itively selecting peptide ligand affinities are lower than
those of negatively selecting ligands for TCRs, but addi-
tionally linked to their MHC binding/stability properties
[42]. Our report is consistent with the notion that weak
pMHCI/TCR interactions promote positive selection of SP
CD8 thymocytes. Certainly the 10,000 fold weaker func-
tional stimulation of N15-bearing T cells by L4 versus
VSV8 peptide is in line with the view [14]. Two recent
studies in class II MHC-restricted TCR transgenic mouse
systems also argue that weak pMHC ligands may foster
positive selection [43,44].
Collectively, our data show that cognate peptides can be
modified at key TCR recognition positions to create vari-
ants that result in selection, directly or indirectly, of
desired TCR specificities at the level of thymic develop-
ment. This exogenous peptide administration offers a
potential of expanding repertoire generation in vivo in a
manner useful to the organism. Whether these peptide-
specific T cells generate stronger defense mechanisms to
fight viral infection or tumors in normal, non-transgenic
mice remains to be investigated. The magnitude of the
APL-driven increase in thymocytes and subsequent egress
is only 2–3 fold, however. This level of change likely
reflects the tightly regulated thymocyte egress process. In
this respect, exploring peptide-based means of enhancing
differentiation of thymocytes bearing desired TCRs
together with the modulation of mechanisms controlling
thymocyte emigration to the periphery would be of a great
importance. To this end, various pathways regulating
egress from the thymus are described below and should
be considered as potential targets for such manipulation
in conjunction with APL administration. Although not
discussed further here, thymic vaccination followed by
conventional cognate antigen immunization may be the
best way to insure a robust memory T cell response.
Lymphocyte migration plays an important role in regulat-
ing the localization and orchestration of immune
responses. As thymocytes progress through the develop-
mental stages, they migrate from the cortico-medullary
junction, the site of entry of T cell progenitors from the
BM, to the subcapsular region of the thymus, then to the
cortex and to the medulla [18,19]. Finally, functionally
mature thymocytes exit the thymus and seed the periph-
eral lymphoid tissues. The processes that regulate traffick-
ing of lymphoid precursors to and within the thymus, and
that mediate emigration of mature T cells from the thy-
mus to the periphery remain poorly understood. Several
mediators, including chemokine receptors [45], adhesion
molecules [46], extracellular matrix proteins [47], neu-
roendocrine factors [48] and G-protein coupled receptors
(GPCR) [49] have been shown to regulate thymocyte
export (Fig. 2). Recently, a role for the early activation
marker CD69, transiently expressed on activated mature T
cells and on thymocytes undergoing positive selection, in
controlling thymocyte export, has also been suggested
[50]. Cellular mechanisms involved in thymocyte egress
are discussed in the following sections.
Chemokine pathways (reviewed in ref. [45,51,52])
Chemokines are basic polypeptides of about 100 amino
acids, usually containing four Cys residues linked by
disulphide bonds, which are produced by certain thymic
stroma cells and are abundantly expressed in the thymus.
Specifically, thymic epithelial, medullary epithelial and
dendritic cells have been shown to secrete various chem-
okines. Growing evidence suggests that chemokines and
their receptors, expressed differentially on thymocytes
during discrete maturational stages, control homing of T
cell progenitors to the thymus, their intrathymic migra-
tion, and exit to the periphery. Chemokines deliver sig-
nals for lymphocyte proliferation and survival, and
regulate thymocyte trafficking by functioning in concert
with other adhesion molecules such as selectins and
integrins. Chemokines stimulate responding cells by acti-
vating pertussis toxin-sensitive Gi? protein-coupled
seven-transmembrane receptors (GPCR), leading to acti-
vation of intracellular secondary mediators which control
directional cell migration. To date, 43 human chemokines
have been identified, acting via binding to 19 different
GPCR.
Some chemokine receptors are expressed in DP and SP
thymocytes, e.g. CCR9, with its ligand CCL25 secreted by
TEC and DC. Others, e.g. CCR5 and CCR8, expressed on
mature SP thymocytes, have been suggested to play a role
in mediating thymocyte emigration. In particular, CCR7
has been demonstrated to mediate homing of naïve T cells
to peripheral lymphoid organs via ligands CCL19 and
CCL21.
Extracellular matrix proteins (reviewed in [47])
Extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins laminin and
fibronectin are produced by TECs, fibroblasts and MHC
class II+ macrophages in the thymus. Other ECM proteins
including nidogen, associated with laminin, and galectins
-1, -3, and -5 as well as glycosaminoglycans are produced
by thymic epithelium. ECM proteins form molecular
bridges between thymocytes and the thymic microenvi-
ronment, mediating adhesion of thymocytes via their
ECM receptors VLA-4, -5 and -6, and their disassembly
from the cell complexes. In the absence of ECM proteins,
normal thymocyte development and migration are
severely perturbed, both in in vitro cultures of TEC and in
in vivo knockout mouse models, suggesting a crucial role
of the ECM protein network in the thymic function.
S1P pathway (reviewed in [53,54])
Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a member of sphingoli-
pid family, is an important signaling molecule present in
high concentrations in body fluids. SIP binds to members
of a family of G protein-coupled receptors (S1P1–5/Edg)
with up to nanomolar affinity, triggering diverse effects,
including proliferation, survival, migration, morphogene-
sis, adhesion molecule expression, and cytoskeletal
changes. S1P receptors are widely expressed during
embryonic development and in the adult. The tissue dis-
tribution shows that lymphoid organs express high levels
of S1P1 and S1P4. Thus, these receptors may be potential
targets for pharmacological drug design aimed at effecting
thymocyte migration.
The expression of S1P1 on T cells controls their exit from
the thymus and entry into the blood, and, thus, has a cen-
tral role in regulating the numbers of peripheral T-cells
[55]. Interestingly, S1P1 knock-out mice show a block in
the egress of mature T-cells into the periphery. The regu-
lated expression of S1P1 receptor levels, which is increased
in mature SP thymocytes and peripheral T cells, may con-
trol responsiveness to the high levels of sphingosine 1-
phosphate in the blood, which selectively induces mature
T-cell migration to the periphery. Recently, S1P1 receptors
have been implicated in lymphocyte trafficking and hom-
ing based on studies using FTY720, a potent immunosup-
pressive agent, which is an agonist ligand for S1P1,3,4,5
receptors blocking egress of T cells from the thymus. Stud-
ies of thymocyte egress mechanisms through the S1P
receptor pathway may aid in facilitating emigration from
the thymus to the periphery and provide additional
means of enriching the mature T cell pool with desired
specificities.
Currently available vaccines unquestionably represent a
success story in modern medicine and have had a dra-
matic effect on morbidity and mortality worldwide.
Nonetheless, it is clear that improvements are required to
enable the development of vaccines against infectious dis-
eases that have so far proven difficult to control with con-
ventional approaches (HIV-1, malaria, tuberculosis, etc.).
Thymic vaccination might offer promising clinical appli-
cations as a way of immunization against these infectious
diseases and cancers, enabling "designer" thymic develop-
ment to produce suitable and long-lasting protective T cell
immune specificities. In a converse role, deletion of
unwanted T cell specificities in the case of autoimmunity
by agonist administration early in life could be
considered. Assuming thymic vaccination proves clini-
cally viable, immune responses against invariant compo-
nents of infectious agents, such as HIV and malaria, which
otherwise utilize their intrinsic mutational capacity to
evade human immune recognition, can be targeted.
Design of novel vaccines based on the thymic vaccination
approaches will benefit from the information gained in
the recently completed Human Genome Project, particu-
larly as genetic polymorphism associated with high risk of
developing certain diseases later in life including cancers,
infectious disease susceptibility and autoimmunity are
uncovered. For example, the ability to manipulate the T
cell repertoire to elicit anti-tumor responses early in life
may prevent clinical disease evolution later. Powerful bio-
informatic tools such as computer-based identification of
HLA-allele specific binding epitopes and structural insight
into TCR-pMHC interactions will aid in the epitope-based
APL design process [56].
Conclusions
A thymic vaccination strategy has been conceived based
on the current knowledge of thymocyte differentiation
and repertoire generation. This approach differs substan-
tially from conventional vaccination since it aims to shape
T cell responses through thymic repertoire manipulation,
exposing developing thymocytes to positively selecting
APL derived from infectious agents or tumors. Experimen-
tal data to date suggest that this strategy is possible in in
vivo mouse models using irradiation chimeras reconsti-
tuted with bone marrow progenitors from TCR-transgenic
animals. Increasing emigration of antigen-specific T cells
from the thymus to the periphery is a challenging goal. In
the future, a combined approach of exposing the subject
to a positively selecting APL plus a thymic export-enhanc-
ing agent might generate practical and efficient protective
repertoire manipulations. Potential applications may
include design and administration of APL against cancer,
infectious and autoimmune diseases.
List of abbreviations
APL, altered peptide ligand; BM, bone marrow; CMJ, cor-
tico-medullary junction; DC, dendritic cells; DN, double
negative; DP, double positive; GPCR, G-protein-coupled
receptors; HEV, high endothelial venule; MMP, matrix
metalloproteinases; RTE, recent thymic emigrants; SP, sin-
gle positive; S1P, sphingosine 1-phosphate; TCR, T cell
receptor; TEC, thymic epithelial cells.
Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests.
Authors' contributions
MFH carried out the study, including experimental design
and data acquisition, drafted and revised the manuscript.
ELR conceived of the study, participated in its design and
coordination, and helped to draft and revise the manu-
script. The authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
