Title:
Purification technology for renewable production
of fuel from methanolysis of waste sunflower oil in
the presence of high silica zeolite beta

Abstract:
Waste sun?ower oil (WSO) can be easily produced as a reliable resource sustainable for
multifunctional applications. WSO methanolysis in the presence of high silica zeolite beta
(HSZB) treated with KOH as a catalyzer in a trans-esteri?cation reaction was used for the fatty
acid methyl ester (FAME) synthesis. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) as a co-solvent of 20 wt.% was added
for mass transfer intensi?cation. Conversion e?ciency of 96.5% was obtained within 4 h
reaction time of the re?ux reaction, methanol:oil ratio of 9:1, 2 wt.% of catalyst and agitation
speed of 300 rpm. Furthermore, these KOH treated HSZB catalysts still exhibit acceptable
sustainability and appropriate catalysis in the trans-esteri?cation after three consecutive cycling.
It is concluded that K2O existing in the pores and the defect sites of the alkali-treated HSZB can
be supplied to the surface of the catalysts structure during the trans-esteri?cation in three
consecutive rounds to result in 66.3% percentage of conversion.

----------------------


Text:
----------------------

Renewable fuel has greatly attracted the attention of
researchers to be used instead of conventional diesel
to decrease environmental pollutions and the relative
negative e?ects (1). Biodiesel as a biofuel consists of
mono alkyl esters which are attained by trans-esteri?ca-
tion of animal fat or plant oil with alcohols of short chain
such as ethanol or methanol (2). Methanolysis or trans-
esteri?cation is considered as the best technique for
reducing viscosity of plant oils (3). However, waste oil
is considerably cheaper than pure re?ned vegetable
oils; it is noteworthy that disposal of waste materials
like waste cooking may cause health-related risks and
the environmental risks (4,5). Waste oil, as a plentiful
and sustainable feedstock, can be used for biodiesel pro-
duction (6), but the extensive pretreatments a?ect its
economic viability since the economic aspects of biodie-
sel production are of considerable importance for its sus-
tainable preparation (7).
Utilization of heterogeneous catalysts is considered
as an important factor for the commercial production
of biodiesel (8,9). Due to a variety of advantages such
as less corrosion, convenient handling and separation,
reusability and less amount of toxic wastes, hetero-
geneous catalysts are considered as e?cient alternatives
to homogeneous catalyst (10). Production of zeolite as a
catalyst has increasingly improved in recent years (11). In
general, zeolites are based on the structure of three-
dimensional network of an aluminum and silicon tetra-
hedral as TO4 (T = Co, Fe, Si, B, Al, Ge, P) linked by
shared oxygen atoms (12). The positive charge of alumi-
num is lower than silicon’s positive charge. Conse-
quently, the frame has generally a net negative charge
balanced by exchangeable (e.g. Mg2+, Na+, Ca2+ and
K+). As a result, this negative surface charge gives
zeolite an excellent a?nity for cationic ions (13,14). A
rich variety of zeolite types have been considered and
used for waste oils trans-esteri?cation including KOH/
bentonite zeolite (15), NaOH/bentonite (16,17), natural
zeolite from Pacitan Indonesia (18), zeolite tu? (19),
KOH/ZSM5 zeolite (20), clinoptilolite zeolite (21), etc.
High silica zeolite beta (HSZB) is one of the most
widely used porous materials because of large cages
and pores, three-dimensional channel networks and
high Si/Al ratio (22). The main advantage of using het-
erogeneous catalyst is minimizing the problems associ-
ated with homogeneous catalyst which are recycling
and regeneration, catalyst separation and soap for-
mation (21,23). As a consequence, the extensive
product puri?cation steps and disposal problems are
eliminated to o?er an economical pathway for pro-
duction of biodiesel.
The present study aims at developing a new hetero-
geneous catalyst from HSZB for fatty acid methyl ester
(FAME) production from waste sun?ower oil (WSO).
The heterogeneous zeolite beta catalyst is economically
feasible, technically applicable and environmentally
friendly with a lowest level of complexity system in pre-
paring and using the product. In this research, the het-
erogeneous alkaline zeolite beta catalyst was loaded
and prepared to produce FAME through the trans-ester-
i?cation reaction resulted from re?ux. Catalyst proper-
ties have been analyzed by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX),
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), Brunauer–Emmett–
Teller (BET) and X-ray di?raction (XRD) analyses. In this
research, the used catalyst was prepared from impreg-
nation of HSZB by KOH solution. The characteristics of
the texture of this catalyst was examined for under-
standing its structure, considering active sites in the cat-
alyst, and its sustainability in the study to provide proper
conditions for trans-esteri?cation reaction of the WSO
using the advantages of the catalyst. The prepared
zeolite beta catalysts were used for trans-esteri?cation
of WSO to biodiesel production. Also parameters like
catalyst weight percent, alcohol:oil molar ratio, temp-
erature, di?erent percentages of co-solvent and time
were tested. At the end, restoring the intended catalyst
has been surveyed in terms of the obtained optimized
ratios.
2.1. Materials and methods
HSZB was obtained from Delta Factory (Iran). For the
trans-esteri?cation, WSO was collected from the central
restaurant of a big hospital in Tehran. The collected
waste oil has been pretreated before doing work exper-
iment. The method used by Tanawannapong et al. was
applied to use WSO (24). To remove ?ne particles and
suspended matter in the WSO, it was ?rst ?ltered and
then, to reduce the acid value, it went through a 2 h
reaction with sulfuric acid in 1 wt.%. To determine the
acid value, the product was titrated. WSO with an acid
value of 0.38 mgKOH g?1 matching with a free fatty
acid (FFA) level of 0.19% and initial saponi?cation
value of 149.58 mgKOH mg?O1il was used.
Using a Karl–Fischer titration method, the amount of
water in waste oil was measured to be 0.01% (w/w).
Waste oil molecular weight was 863.48 g mol?1,
measured based on saponi?cation value. Equations (1)
and (2) were used to calculate the acid value and FFA,
respectively (25). The oil was taken in a conical ?ask
and dissolved in 50 mL of 2-propanol by gradually
heating it. Using phenolphthalein as indicator, the
obtained solution was titrated against 0.1 N KOH until
a slight pink color was seen. Based on Equation (2), the
FFA content is calculated as half of acid value.
Acid value = N × V × 56,
(2)
where N represents normality titrant (KOH), V stands for
consumed volume titrant (mL), 56 is the equivalent
weight of KOH and W is the weight of fatty acid (g).
Potassium hydroxide (KOH) (99%), tetrahydrofuran
(THF) ((CH2)3CH2O) (?99.8%), sodium sulfate (Na2SO4)
(?99%), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (35%), sulfuric acid
(H2SO4) (95–97%) and methanol (CH3OH) (99.5%) were
supplied by Merck Company (Germany). Oven Pars 120
KET (Iran) and heater magnetic stirrers Heidolph
(Germany) were used in this research.
2.2. Characterization
FT-IR spectra (Nicolet 5700) were measured in the 400–
4000 cm?1 range. All spectra were obtained with a resol-
ution of 4 cm?1 and accumulation of 64 scans. The ?ne
powder solid substances were mixed with potassium
bromide (KBr) and pressed. The samples’ XRD were
measured with a Philips X’pert PRO equipped with a
Cu K? radiation (wavelength= 0.154187 nm) at the
scan speed of 0.03° s?1 (2? = 5–65°). SEM on a Cam
Scan apparatus with the applied voltage of 20 kV was
used to observe the morphology of the samples. To
determine the composition of the compounds, EDX
(Flash & Bruker 6120) data were collected. BELMax
(BEL, Japan) with nitrogen adsorption gas at 77 K and
a pressure P P0–1 = 1 × 10?8 was used to carry out
speci?c surface area (BET) of the prepared samples
(0.5 g powder). The gas chromatography–mass
spectrometry (GC–MS) was equipped with ?ame ioniz-
ation detector (FID) detector and biodiesel column
model of WAXCP 9080 with an internal diameter of
0.25 mm and 30 m length. The carrier gas was helium.
The column temperature was 60°C at the beginning,
constant for 2 min, reaching 210° with a slope of
10° min?1 and immediately reached 230°C with a slope
of 5° min?1 and kept for 10 min at the ?nal temperature.
2.3. Procedure
Considering the loss of catalytic activity caused by poi-
soning, the like phenomenon is an important aspect
when using heterogeneous catalysts. It is mostly
approved that when contacting with air, heterogeneous
catalysts may lose their activity due to adsorption of CO2
and H2O onto the solid surface (26,27). To remove the
organic impurities, HSZB was treated with H2O2 30% sol-
ution. Then, H2O2 solution was disappeared by hot water
several times. In the next stage, to get rid of moisture
from HSZB, the puri?ed HSZB was dried in an oven at
120°C for 10 h. Finally, a hammer was used to pulverize
the dried zeolite. The conventional process of hydrother-
mal treatment with KOH was adopted for the synthesis
of potassic HSZB. First, 7.5 g of the HSZB sample was
incorporated in an alkaline solution (15 g of KOH+
100 mL distilled water) with HSZB/KOH ratio 1:2, under
stirring (300 rpm) at a reaction temperature of 75°C for
2 h. The resulting mixture was dried for two days at
room temperature. After that, the product obtained in
the ?rst stage reacted with potassic solution of 5 M
KOH at 55°C, with a reaction time of 15 h, and then cal-
cined for 4 h at 500°C (Figure 1). Di?erent weight
percent of the catalyst based on the oil weight percent
(0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5) and di?erent molar ratio of metha-
nol:oil (3:1, 6:1, 9:1 and 12:1) were added to the oil.
Di?erent weight percent of the co-solvent (THF) based
on the methanol weight percent (5, 10, 15, 20 and 25)
were used to homogenize the reaction mixture. After-
wards, the solution went under reaction at 55°C temp-
erature with 300 rpm stirring speed. In the experiment,
glycerin was separated from the biodiesel within 2 h,
but di?erent periods of time were allocated to complete
the process. The temperature of the re?ux system is
usually determined based on alcohol boiling point
which causes an increase in the ?nal conversion
percent. In Figure 2, in a 250 mL round bottom ?ask of
re?ux system, the waste oil and catalyst with extra
alcohol were added. After the completion of the trans-
esteri?cation reaction, the two glycerol and biodiesel
phases were separated and the obtained solution was
translocated in the separatory funnel and FAME phase.
In the ?nal phase, crude biodiesel should be washed
with warm distilled water at 60°C to eliminate impurities
and pollutants which may include the remained catalyst,
the non-reacted alcohol, glycerol, FFAs or soap. To get
rid of the soap from the mixture with high soap for-
mation, stearic acid (0.1%) was added to the ?at
bottom ?ask to neutralize and eliminate all formed
soap and unreacted K+. The reaction mixture is washed
with distilled water until it becomes fully clear.
Washing was done three times in this phase. The extra
remained alcohol in this phase should be completely
separated with evaporation or distillation. The washed
FAME is then dried over sodium sulfate. The following
formula was used to calculate biodiesel e?ciency (21):
Figure 3(a,b) displays the XRD used for the inner surface
and the structure, solid and crystalline phase of raw
K2O may be formed on the zeolite particles’ external
structure that shows partial distortion of the structure
of zeolite due to the occurrence of impregnation step
inside the zeolite crystallites. If this happens, some
species of K2O are also formed in the intracrystalline
volume or zeolite structure upper cages (28). The
zeolite peaks intensity decreases with an increase of K
that shows an insigni?cant loss of crystallinity (29).
Regarding that the existing water in zeolite was
removed in the calcination process, KOH was converted
to K2O, as shown in the XRD pattern (15,18,30).
Furthermore, two peaks in the (2?) region = 7° (101)
and 22° (302), according to the JCPDS 48-0038 cards
and literature data, are attributed to the HSZB phase
(31). Kusuma et al. showed that the new phase of potass-
ium oxide is emerged at 2? = 31°, 39°, 51°, 55° and 62°
(18). The K2O formation strongly indicated that the
KOH was well distributed on the surface or structure of
HSZB. This is in association with XRD analysis where
the structure of zeolite is retained even after treatment
alkali (26). However, the peak’s intensity is low due to
high dispersion of K2O particles. In Figure 3(c), K2O was
used in trans-esteri?cation and washed with alcohol
and n-hexane after the process which resulted in the
decrease of K2O in the used catalyst structure in the
third cycle.
Figure 4 indicates SEM images of zeolite (a), the pre-
pared catalyst (b) and the used catalyst (c) in the trans-
esteri?cation process. Treating the structure of HSZB
with KOH agglomerates the pores in zeolite causing
the surface of the prepared catalyst seem more inte-
grated that increases the resistance and sustainability
of the catalyst. The calcination converts KOH to K2O as
active sites in pores and cages of zeolite (19). Alkali
metal oxides can enhance the number of basic sites of
the zeolite and the basic strength (14). This increase in
percentage of conversion is attributed to the higher pot-
assium oxide active sites content in the synthesized cat-
alyst (15). Figure 5(b,c) indicates a representative EDX of
K on the catalyst and used catalyst. The amount of K
element enhanced with the KOH treatment, con?rming
the existence of K element on HSZB, which is considered
a good stability of catalyst since a low amount of K
content was leached during three trans-esteri?cation
cycles.
BET sorptometer (auto absorb from quantachrome)
was used to specify the pore volume and speci?c struc-
ture area of zeolite and catalyst. HSZB having a surface
area and high pore volume, as a result of hydrothermal
treatment during catalyst synthesis decreases particle
size. However, total pore volume and catalyst surface
area have reduced intensely after a blockage of zeolite
surface by K2O impregnation. Pore diameter average
value, on the other hand, has augmented after the
process due to zeolite desilication and formation of
mesopore. Also, catalyst impregnation by K2O increases
the average pore diameter in spite of the reduced
volume of the zeolite beta pores which can be ascribed
to blockage of most micropores by K2O. Accordingly,
more free mesopores will be accessible, enhancing
pores’ average diameter. The total surface area of
HSZB was 465.2 m2 g?1 and the total pore volume was
0.2142 cm3g?1. However, the BET surface area and
total tore volume values of the catalyst were found to
be very low, 34.67 m2 g?1 and 0.0494 m2 g?1, respect-
ively, since potassium compounds covered zeolite
surface and pores during the impregnation step and a
substantial decrease of the pore volume was shown
after the impregnation process.
In Figure 6(a), 3432 cm?1 shows the sharp band of
hydrogen bonded OH, water stretching vibration at
3620 cm?1 and the H2O bending vibration at
1635 cm?1. The band at 3425 cm?1 is related to the –
O–H stretching and 1640 cm?1 is related to bending of
adsorbed water. The peak 1348 cm?1 in FT-IR related
to catalyst shows –O–H deformation vibration of CH2–
OH. The deformation band –Si–O–Si– has a sharp peak
at 460 cm?1. However, the –Si–O– exists in the prepared
zeolite beta; –Al–OH were observed as a result of zeolite
mixing with KOH solution. The SiO4 and AlO4 bands at
1021 and 703 cm?1 display the asymmetric and sym-
metric stretching vibrations of the zeolite structure. In
HSZB, the wavenumbers in 750–820 cm?1 signify the
O–M–O (M = Al, Si) symmetric stretching vibration. In
Figure 6(b), the rise in the OH groups is a common
phenomenon that is associated with the modi?cation
of alkaline for the alkaline environments role in the
surface of zeolite. A new band at 2874 cm?1 was
detected that is attributed to hydroxyl groups formed
during the modi?cation of alkaline of zeolite precursor
by K2O. The region of vibrational band at 821 cm?1
shows the stretching vibrations of K–O group (32).
Figure 6(c) shows that 675 cm?1 is related to –O–Al–O–
symmetric stretching. The ?rst two peaks from 721 and
880 cm?1 show the used catalyst’s impurities. The peak
at 1082 cm?1 shows asymmetric stretching of –Si–O–Si
— and the peak at 1061 cm?1 was the carbonate
species characteristic peak. In Figure 6(c), the peaks at
3651 and 3413 cm?1 were attributed to OH– stretching
of Si(OH)Al and the bending vibration of hydroxyl
groups of absorbed H2O at 1644 cm?1 (14,20). After
the conversion reactions, the FT-IR spectrum of the
used catalyst displayed the main groups with noticeable
changes in their positions and intensities as well as the
appearance of other new bands. The C–H stretching of
–CH3 appeared at 2927 cm?1 that is assigned to the
methyl or/and methylene groups of methyl esters
adsorbed by the catalyst particles. Furthermore, the
presence of C=O was established by the observation of
the band at 1765 cm?1 (33).
Figure 7 indicates the e?ect of alcohol on biodiesel
e?ciency within a range of 3:1–12:1. Increasing metha-
nol more than the optimized amount does not
enhance the reaction which is attributed to the fact
that glycerol will be solved partly in the excess methanol
consequently to prevent methanol reaction with the cat-
alyst. Su?cient amount of alcohol can enhance the per-
formance of the trans-esteri?cation reaction towards the
forward direction and increase the miscibility between
the reactant phases (34). However, excessive alcohol
has four reversible e?ects including the deactivation of
catalyst, dilution of the present mixture and the associ-
ated changes, the possible dissolution of glycerol bypro-
ducts and the associated orientation of the reaction to
the reversible direction, and the expected changes in
the alcohol polar groups which convert the alcohol mol-
ecules to be emulsi?er centers (35). FAME yield of 96.5%
was obtained in the presence of alcohol:oil molar ratio of
9:1, 2 wt.% HSZB, co-solvent amount of 20 wt.%. Since
methanol was absorbed by HSZB, the optimal metha-
nol:oil molar ratio was higher than 6:1 which is a com-
monly agreed optimal alcohol:oil ratio in the
traditional heterogeneous base catalyzed trans-
esteri?cation.
Figure 8 shows the e?ect of zeolite beta concen-
tration (wt.%) in the trans-esteri?cation reaction within
the range of 0.5–2.5 wt.% of catalyst to weight percent
of WSO. The conversion reaction has increased from
0.5 to 2 wt.% by the catalyst loading. Figure 8 shows
that when catalysis dosage goes more than 2 wt.%,
FAME reduces. Optimization of catalyst amount is an
important issue in reaching the highest production
percent since using excessive catalyst causes saponi?ca-
tion of the mixture and formation of gelatinous sub-
stance leading to extreme decline of the trans-
esteri?cation process. Previous studies and the present
research showed that trans-esteri?cation occurs with
K2O catalytic activity and using zeolite, without K2O as
a base catalyst does not lead to trans-esteri?cation
(17,21).
Temperature is one of the most contributing factors
in trans-esteri?cation yield. In Figure 9, the temperature
range of 25–65°C was considered. The higher the temp-
erature, the lower the viscosity will be to intensify the
trans-esteri?cation process. High temperature facilitates
the mass transfer between oil and alcohol molecules and
consequently increases FAME conversion. It is note-
worthy that in Figure 9, the reaction temperature
should be a little lower than alcohol boiling point to
prevent alcohol evaporation. Because of this, 60°C
showed the highest percent of FAME conversion.
Addition of a co-solvent to the trans-esteri?cation
reaction makes methanol and waste oil phase mutually
miscible (36). Miscibility of the phases increases the reac-
tion rate due to disappearance of mass transfer resist-
ance between the phases of oil and alcohol (21,37).
Figure 10 shows that for this study, the optimum co-
solvent to weight percent (wt.%) of methanol ratio is
20 wt.% producing 96.5% biodiesel yield. It can be con-
cluded that reaction of trans-esteri?cation in the pres-
ence of co-solvent takes less time and the purpose of
using co-solvent is to reduce energy consumption and
time of reaction. As shown in Figure 10, in the absence
of co-solvent, the percentage of conversion reduces to
71.5% in the ?xed 4 h (T = 60°C, 300 rpm, methanol:
waste oil molar ratio 9:1, 2 wt.% catalyst). Further
increase in the co-solvent ratio lowered the content of
FAME probably as a result of the dilution of the reac-
tants. With 25 wt.% of the co-solvent, WSO concen-
tration decreased and consequently reactions
decreased (38).
Restoring and reusing catalyst is one of the greatest
advantages of heterogeneous catalysts (39). The catalyst
was separated after ?nalizing and reaching the highest
e?ciency washed with methanol and n-hexane. This
washing allows catalyst’s active sites to get rid of mol-
ecules which poison these sites. The reduction in conver-
sion percent can be caused by organics deposition
inside the molecular sieve which results in active sites
decline and active ingredient leaching. At the third
run, the zeolite beta deactivates to a certain degree
and conversion percent decreases to 66.3% which is
caused by leaching of active sites of catalysts structure
and obstruction of the active sites during the trans-ester-
i?cation process (Figure 11).
Figure 12(a) shows the characterization properties of
the layered structure of catalyst and properties of ion
exchange. The structure of the catalyst is mainly com-
posed of an octahedral sheet which is placed between
two tetrahedron sheets (40). This catalyst has consider-
able advantages including a structure with many cages
and pores, high ion exchange and a wide surface area
caused by high porosity. In addition, the activation of
alkaline on the sur?cial siloxane groups leads to
hydration of the HSZB sheets. Also, the activation of
HSZB by alkaline treatment highly a?ected the crystal
structure of the catalyst. The sharing of the silica tetrahe-
dron structures causes the formation of active sites with
cages and pores. The active sites act as traps for K2O in
the activation process of the catalyst surface. Generally,
K2O can be placed within the catalyst structure by
partial replacement of ions of aluminum and silicon
and as trapped within the interlayer molecules of H2O.
In the presence of water, K2O can convert into KOH
where K+ converts into active sites for the trans-esteri?-
cation reaction through blocking the pore openings on
the zeolite surface (29).
Figure 12(b) displays the trans-esteri?cation reaction
mechanism for biodiesel production using HSZB
treated with KOH. In the ?rst step of reaction, CH3O?
ion is formed from the reaction between the active site
of K2O with methanol. This CH3O? ion is a strong base
which has high catalytic activity in the trans-esteri?ca-
tion reaction (18). In the second step, the reactive
CH3O? ion attacks the carbonyl carbon atom of WSO
to form tetrahedral intermediate. Further rearrangement
of tetrahedral intermediate produced one methyl ester
molecule and diglyceride anion. In the third step, digly-
ceride molecule reconstruction began with the reaction
with H+ from the catalyst. In step 4, the diglyceride anion
may also react with methanol and generate reactive
CH3O? ion. The catalytic reaction was then followed by
the reaction between diglyceride and other CH3O? ion
to produce monoglyceride molecule and one methyl
ester molecule. Finally, CH3O? ion attacked carbonyl
carbon atom of monoglyceride to produce one methyl
ester molecule and one glycerol molecule.
Table 1 shows GC–MS of FAME with methyl stearate,
methyl palmitate, and methyl oleate as main products.
The physical and chemical properties of the produced
biodiesel using HSZB including kinematic pour point,
cetane number, ?ash point, density and viscosity were
determined by standard analysis as shown in Table 2.
Viscosity is an important factor in biodiesel quality so
that biodiesel fuel ?uidity is directly in?uenced by its vis-
cosity increase. Injector performance is a?ected by vis-
cosity. The lower the viscosity, the better the pumping,
atomization, and ?ner droplets achievement. The
minimum range of ?ash point is a necessary condition
for handling and fuel safety. Flash point which is very
important in preventing liquid explosion and ?ring
hazards should be in the speci?ed standard range. As
shown in Table 2, the produced biodiesel ?ash pint is
150°C. Therefore, it can be concluded that this biodiesel
is safe for handling and storage for some period of time.
The cetane number of the obtained biodiesel was 56°C
which is a little beyond the standard limit. The ignition
quality of diesel fuels and the combustion quality of
diesel fuel during compression ignition depend on
cetane number.
Table 3 shows the comparison of the results of this
research with other recent reports of articles on using
zeolite as a heterogeneous catalyst in raw materials
trans-esteri?cation. It is seen that alkaline catalyst of
HSZB is a good alternative in methanolysis of WSO
aiming at production of biodiesel.
The purpose of this work was to develop an applicable
solid catalytic system from HSZB for renewable diesel
production from WSO currently attracting increasing
attention as an inexpensive feedstock for production
of FAME. The suggested catalyst in this study was
made from impregnation of HSZB with KOH solution
which was converted to K2O during the calcination
process. K2O as the active catalyst factor has been scat-
tered in the structure pores and surface fractures of
HSZB. Proper translocation of K2O in these sites brings
about catalyst stability for reusing. Moreover, the inter-
action of methanol:waste oil molar ratio and the
amount of modi?ed zeolite beta through K2O and THF
as a co-solvent amount were found to have signi?cant
e?ects on conversion of FAME. Addition of a co-
solvent to the trans-esteri?cation reaction makes metha-
nol and waste oil phase mutually miscible. The
maximum renewable fuel conversion obtained in 4 h
reaction time at a temperature of 60°C, co-solvent
amount of 20 wt.%, methanol:waste oil molar ratio of
9:1, 2 wt.% catalyst and stirring speed of 300 rpm.
