Title:
Early life stress and HPA axis function independently predict
adult depressive symptoms in metropolitan Cebu, Philippines
Abstract:
Objectives: Alterations in adult hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis activity
have increasingly been linked with early life stress and adult depression, but a limited
number of studies have used longitudinal data to explore HPA axis dysregulation as
an underlying mechanism driving the long-term depressive impacts of early stressors.
Here we address potential long-term impacts of early life, family-based stress on
depressive symptoms among young adults in a longitudinal birth cohort study begun
in 1983 in the Philippines.
Materials and methods: We relate a composite measure of family-based stressors experi-
enced between birth and adolescence to circadian dynamics in adult salivary cortisol and
depressive risk measured at 21–22 years of age. Multiple regression analyses were con-
ducted to examine the relationship between early life stress levels and risk of adult depres-
sive symptoms, as well as the role of adult diurnal cortisol activity in this relationship.
Results: Greater levels of early life familial stress predicted more severe depressive
symptomatology at age 21–22 in a dose–response fashion (p < .0001) independent
of adult diurnal cortisol patterns. Flatter diurnal cortisol slopes are directly associated
with higher adult depressive symptoms, an effect mostly driven by evening cortisol
levels (p = .004). When considering the cumulative effects of early life stress mea-
sures, however, exposure to more of these stressors during development is associ-
----------------------
Subtitles:
 1 | INTRODUCTION
 2 | METHODS
 2.1 | Study population and data collection
 2.2|Measuresofearlylifestressanddepressive
symptoms
 2.3|Cortisolcollection,preparation,and
measurement
 2.4 | Covariates
 2.5 | Data analyses
 3 | RESULTS
 4 | DISCUSSION
 4.1 | Limitations
 5 | CONCLUSION


Text:
----------------------
1 | INTRODUCTION
Depression accounts for a large and growing burden of disease world-
wide and disproportionately impacts individuals living in low- and
middle-income countries (Patel 2007; Vigo et al. 2016). Increasing evi-
dence suggests that physical, nutritional, and psychosocial insults
increase the risk of adult depression and other forms of mental and
physical illnesses, particularly when individuals endure these impacts
during early development (Barker et al. 1999; Chapman et al., 2004).
For example, numerous studies have consistently reported that histo-
ries of childhood stress and trauma elevate individual risk of develop-
ing depression during adulthood (Carr, Martins, Stingel, Lemgruber, &
Juruena, 2013; Heim & Binder, 2012; Hovens et al., 2010; Kim,
Nyengerai, & Mendenhall, 2020; Mandelli, Petrelli, & Serretti, 2015;
Wiersma et al., 2009). The durable effects of early life psychosocial
stress exposure are also known to predict adult depression beyond
the influence of genetic predispositions, as these patterns have been
reported in twin studies (Kendler et al., 2000; Nelson et al., 2002). Elu-
cidating the possible underlying biological correlates, in diverse cul-
tural contexts, can allow for the identification of universal biocultural
pathways that contribute to the lasting impacts of early life experi-
ences on adult depression and can illuminate potential opportunities
to ameliorate the long-term poor health outcomes shaped by these
adverse experiences and conditions.
The hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, a primary physio-
logical system involved in the mammalian stress response, has been
implicated as an important biological system that sustains the impacts
of early life psychosocial and environmental exposures and shapes
later life mental health status (Heim & Binder, 2012; Miller, Chen, &
Parker, 2011; Taylor, Way, & Seeman, 2011). Normal HPA axis activ-
ity follows a diurnal rhythm where circulating cortisol concentrations
are elevated upon waking, surge post-waking to reach peak levels
~30 min after waking (a phenomenon known as the cortisol awaken-
ing response), and decrease across the day until reaching the body's
lowest levels before slumber (Kirschbaum & Hellhammer, 1989;
Pruessner et al., 1997; Weitzman et al., 1971). Early life stress expo-
sure and adverse social, emotional, and physical conditions have con-
sistently been reported as strong predictors of HPA axis dysregulation
as indexed by abnormal diurnal cortisol rhythms and reactions to
stressful events (Gustafsson, Janlert, Theorell, & Hammarström, 2010;
Heim & Binder, 2012; Taylor et al., 2011; Thayer, Wilson, Kim, &
Jaeggi, 2018), though the direction of these relationships has varied
across the literature. For example, individuals who experienced early
life stress have exhibited both higher (Luecken & Appelhans, 2006;
Schalinski, Elbert, Steudte-Schmiedgen, & Kirschbaum, 2015; van der
Vegt, Van Der Ende, Kirschbaum, Verhulst, & Tiemeier, 2009) and
lower levels of basal cortisol (DeSantis, Kuzawa, & Adam, 2015; Tri-
ckett, Noll, Susman, Shenk, & Putnam, 2010; van der Vegt
et al., 2009) during adulthood. Early life stress is also related to an
altered cortisol awakening response (Butler, Klaus, Edwards, &
Pennington, 2017; Engert, Efanov, Dedovic, Dagher, &
Pruessner, 2011; Fogelman & Canli, 2018; Gonzalez, Jenkins,
Steiner, & Fleming, 2009) and evening cortisol levels (Engert
et al., 2011; Gustafsson et al., 2010) in adulthood in both positive and
negative directions. Additionally, adults with a history of child abuse
and neglect have been reported to exhibit signs of HPA axis dys-
regulation as evidenced by greater (Heim et al., 2000; Luecken &
Appelhans, 2006; Pesonen et al., 2010; Vaccarino, Levitan, &
Ravindran, 2015) and blunted levels (Carnut?{t\hskip-0.7ex\char "B8}a,
Cris?an, Vulturar, Opre, & Miu, 2015; Carpenter et al., 2007; Carpenter,
Tell, Gaylord-Harden, & Mathews, 2017; Lovallo, Farag, Sorocco,
Cohoon, & Vincent, 2012) of cortisol reactivity in response to acute
psychosocial stressors. Early life stress-induced HPA-axis dys-
regulation has also been seen in non-human primates. Unpredictable
separations from the mother, unpredictable maternal feedings, or
spontaneous maternal abusive behavior among captive rhesus
macaque infants were found to predict altered diurnal cortisol
rhythms characterized by lower morning levels, higher daytime levels,
and flatter cortisol slopes across the day (Coplan et al., 1996; Sánchez
et al., 2005). This pattern of diurnal rhythm disruption persisted for
months to even years after the initial period of adversity.
Dysregulation of circadian HPA axis rhythms has consistently
been characterized as a neuroendocrinological phenotype of depres-
sion in animal and human studies (Adam et al., 2010; Arborelius et al.
1999; Doane et al., 2013; Heim & Binder, 2012; Jarcho, Slavich,
Tylova-Stein, Wolkowitz, & Burke, 2013; Mangold, Marino, &
Javors, 2011; Plotsky, Owens, & Nemeroff, 1998; Vrshek-Schallhorn
et al., 2013). Prior research has reported that depressed patients and
individuals at high risk of depression tend to exhibit altered evening
cortisol concentrations and cortisol awakening responses (CAR)
(Adam et al., 2017; Engert et al., 2011; Pruessner, Hellhammer,
Pruessner, & Lupien, 2003). For instance, elevated levels of evening
cortisol have been reported to be characteristic of major depressive
disorder (MDD) in both adolescents (Angold & Worthman, 1993; Dahl
et al., 1991; Goodyer et al., 1996) and adults (Gold, Goodwin, &
Chrousos, 1988; Plotsky et al., 1998; Young et al., 1994). Similarly,
higher CAR levels have been associated longitudinally with a height-
ened risk of developing MDD (Adam et al., 2010). Cross-sectional
studies have previously reported positive associations between CAR
levels and depressive symptoms (Dahl et al., 1991; Pruessner
et al., 2003). Although not all depressed patients display HPA axis dys-
regulation (Heim, Newport, Mletzko, Miller, & Nemeroff, 2008), these
alterations in diurnal cortisol rhythms are thought to influence depres-
sion, possibly as a result of inflammation caused by glucocorticoid
receptor insensitivity (Miller, Maletic, & Raison, 2009) and impairment
of glucocorticoid-mediated negative feedback processes of the HPA
axis (Pariante & Lightman, 2008). Thus, prior research has emphasized
that alterations in HPA axis function are not only affected by the
embodiment of early life and recent social experiences but may also
predict individual risk for depression later in life.
The role of the HPA axis in shaping the depressive effects of early
life stress, however, remains unclear as results from past studies have
reported mixed findings (Engert et al., 2011; Gerritsen et al., 2010;
Gonzalez et al., 2009; Mangold et al., 2011; Zilioli et al., 2016).
Although growing evidence has implicated early life stress-induced
alterations in HPA axis function as a possible mechanism for adult
depression, the potential psychobiological mechanisms that underlie
the long-term depressive effects of early life stress are not well-
known. Additionally, these studies have mostly been conducted
among Western and industrialized populations, where cultural, eco-
nomic, and psychosocial environments vary in comparison to low- and
middle-income contexts, where the burden of mental illness is the
contexts and populations is necessary to assess the generalizability of
the effects of early life social experience on downstream health out-
comes and to identify the factors that may increase psychopathologi-
cal risk. Additionally, few studies explore the durability of the effects
of early life conditions on HPA axis function, as a majority of studies
tend to examine early life stress retrospectively, rather than prospec-
tively. Numerous scholars have made the call for further longitudinal
studies on HPA axis function for these reasons (Heim et al., 2008;
Koss & Gunnar, 2018; Tarullo & Gunnar, 2006).
Our aim in the current study is to explore whether the role of
early life stress as a predictor of adult depression is accounted for by
alterations in adult HPA axis function in a non-clinical, naturalistic set-
ting. Data come from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Sur-
vey (CLHNS), a longitudinal population-based birth cohort study
located in metropolitan Cebu, Philippines (Adair et al. 2011). Recent
prevalence estimates of depression in the Philippines calculate that
~3.3 million adults, or ~3–4% of the total population, are affected by
depression (WHO, 2017), and some cross-sectional studies report
higher rates in higher risk groups such as those living in low income
communities (22.5%) (Flores, Tuazon, Hernandez, &
Evangelista, 2017). Between 2007 and 2017, depressive disorders
accounted for the eighth-leading cause of disability in the Philippines
(IHME, 2017). Previous research studies from the CLHNS sample have
reported dramatically higher rates of depression among individuals
who witnessed domestic violence growing up (Hindin &
Gultiano, 2006) and that lifecourse socioeconomic status predicts
altered adult diurnal cortisol rhythms (DeSantis et al., 2015). We build
on this work to test the hypothesis that a composite measure of early
life stressors will predict depressive symptoms during early adulthood.
Additionally, we further hypothesize that altered HPA axis function,
as reflected by elevated salivary bedtime cortisol and cortisol awaken-
ing response levels, will account for the depressive effects of early life
stress.
2 | METHODS
2.1 | Study population and data collection
Data come from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey
(CLHNS), an ongoing, population-based birth cohort study of mothers
and their infants born in 1983–1984 in Cebu, Philippines (Adair
et al., 2010). A single stage, random clustering sampling procedure
selected 17 urban and 16 rural communities (barangays) among the
243 barangays in the metropolitan Cebu area, resulting in the recruit-
ment of 3,327 pregnant women. Initial and follow-up surveys were
conducted through question-based, in-home interviews. Data for this
analysis come from survey rounds conducted in 1991–1992,
1994–1995, 1998, 2002, and 2005 (Adair et al., 2010). All interviews
were completed in Cebuano. Complete socio-demographic, psychoso-
cial, mental health, and cortisol data were available for 1,244 partici-
pants. Participants with highly atypical sleep patterns were excluded
those of shift workers, are known to exhibit altered diurnal cortisol
rhythms (Kudielka, Buchtal, Uhde, & Wust, 2007; Niu et al., 2011).
Comparisons of our analytic sample with the larger cohort sample
from the 2005 collection not included in this analysis show nonsignifi-
cant differences in household income at birth and 2005, the fre-
quency of sibling death, feeling distant from one's father, and
depressive symptom severity (all p > .3). Household income at birth
and 2005 and depressive symptoms were lower in the analytical sam-
ple relative to the excluded sample, while the frequencies of sibling
death and feelingdistant from one's father were greater in the analyti-
cal sample. Conversely, education levels at 2005 (p = .0067) and
assets at 2005 (p = .0398) were higher in the analytical sample, while
maternal absence (p = .00001), paternal absence (p = .00001), and
feeling close to one's mother (p = .0141) occurred more frequently in
the excluded sample. The analytical sample tended to witness parental
violence at a greater proportion (p = .075). Thus, the analytic sample is
slightly more advantaged than the larger CLHNS cohort. This research
was conducted under conditions of written informed consent with
human subjects clearance from the Institutional Review Boards of the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Northwestern
University.
2.2|Measuresofearlylifestressanddepressive
symptoms
Six measures of early life family-related stress were operationalized as
dichotomous categorical variables and summed to create a composite
score. Early life stress variables included measures of maternal
absence, paternal instability, sibling death, witnessing domestic vio-
lence during childhood (Gettler et al 2015; Hindin & Gultiano, 2006),
and reverse scored measures of feeling close to one's mother during
childhood, and closeness to one's father during childhood
(Hindin, 2005). Participants were classified as having experienced
maternal absence if they lived in a separate household than their
mother at 8.5 years old in 1991 or 11.5 years old in 1994. Individuals
who were classified as having experienced “paternal instability” were
those whose father was deceased or absent, whose mother was
unmarried during their first year of life or beyond, or whose mother
remarried during their childhood-juvenile period from birth up to age
11.5 (±0.4) years, which was in 1994. Sibling death was assessed
based upon maternal reports of her children's births and deaths from
1983 until 1994 when participants were 11.5 years old, also in 1994.
Finally, participants during the 2002 data collection wave (17–
19 years of age) were asked “Do you remember if either of your
parents/caretakers ever hit, slapped, kicked, or used other means like
pushing or shoving to try to hurt the other physically when you were
growing up?” as a measure of witnessing domestic violence during
childhood.
Additionally, we evaluated the impact of negative parental rela-
tionship as reflected in a measure of parental support. Prior research
has reported poorer mental health outcomes during adulthood when
Kessler, & Shaver, 1997; Nickerson, Bryant, Aderka, Hinton, &
Hofmann, 2013). Negative parenting measures were similarly limited
and consisted of two variables that measured parental support and
were reverse scored, specifically questions that asked whether the
participant felt close to one's mother and father during childhood dur-
ing the 2002 data collection when children were 17–19 years old
(Hock et al., 2016). Domestic violence questions were administered in
2002 as well. Whether an individual witnessed domestic violence and
felt close to one's parents were retrospective reports of the individ-
ual's experience growing up, while measures of maternal absence,
paternal absence, and sibling death were assessed at the time of data
collection. After the six categorical stress variables were summed, the
composite variable was recoded to four groups: 0, 1, 2, and 3+
stressors. Each level of this variable was dummy coded in order to
examine dose–response or threshold effects. These six variables were
among the small handful of data points on early life stress that were
collected during the study, which was initially designed to study the
long-term health impacts of infant feeding.
Depressive symptoms were measured using an adapted version
of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D),
which is a commonly utilized mental health battery used to screen for
depression and assess depressive symptomatology (Radloff, 1977).
The CES-D was administered during the 2005 data collection wave
for the CLHNS when participants were 21–22 years old. This survey
queries both negative (e.g., difficulty eating and sleeping, feeling
lonely, suicidal thoughts, etc.) and positive experiences (e.g., feeling
happy, hopeful about the future, enjoyed daily activities, etc.). Ratings
on a three-point scale ranged from “none of the time” (0), “occasion-
ally” (1), to “most or all of the time” (2). Scores were summed across all
questions, following reverse scoring of positive items, to generate an
index of depressive symptoms. Cronbach's ? was .7338, suggesting an
acceptable degree of scale reliability.
2.3|Cortisolcollection,preparation,and
measurement
During the 2005 survey, each participant was provided with instruc-
tions and three polypropylene tubes for saliva collection. Three sam-
ples representing cortisol levels at key points in time in the diurnal
cortisol cycle were collected. The first was collected at bedtime, the
next immediately upon waking, and the final sample 30 min after wak-
ing. This protocol allowed us to capture both morning and evening
cortisol levels in a limited timeframe; we believe any error
(or additional state variation) introduced by sampling evening levels
on 1 day and morning levels on the next day is compensated for by
the large sample size (~1,250 participants) associated with this study
(Adam & Kumari, 2009). Each tube was pre-labeled to avoid confusion
and contamination, and participants were further instructed to keep
the other two empty tubes in a Ziploc bag beside their bed to more
easily facilitate the collection of the second saliva sample immediately
upon waking. Participants were also given timers to set to 30 min, at
which time they provided the third sample, and were instructed not to
brush their teeth or smoke 30 min before providing any samples. Par-
ticipants were also provided diaries in which they were instructed to
record the date and exact time the samples were provided (Adam &
Kumari, 2009).
The cortisol awakening response was estimated by subtracting
the waking cortisol values from the levels 30 min later, although we
recognize that this calculation of CAR no longer meets the guidelines
for optimal measurement (Stalder et al., 2016). All cortisol values were
natural log transformed to correct strong positive skews, and mea-
sures in this analysis were standardized such that effect sizes could be
easily compared across different cortisol measures. Diurnal slopes
were calculated by subtracting waking cortisol levels from evening
levels and dividing this value by the length of the waking day in hours
using data from both days of saliva sampling (DeSantis et al., 2015).
An hourly rate of cortisol decline from morning levels to evening
levels was therefore calculated, with steeper slopes reflected by a
larger, more negative rate of decline, and flatter slopes associated
with a smaller negative decline or an increase in cortisol from morning
to evening levels.
viewer, who placed the tubes on ice packs in a cooler while in transit
to freezer storage at ?35C. Samples were shipped on dry ice to
Northwestern University, where they were stored at ?80C. They
were later thawed, centrifuged, supernatant separated, and aliquoted
into smaller tubes for analysis of individual analytes. Cortisol was
assayed in duplicate by a laboratory in Trier, Germany, using a time-
resolved immunoassay with fluorometric detection (DELFIA). The
intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation (CVs) were between 4.0
and 6.7%, and 7.1 to 9.0%, respectively. Samples with CVs over 12%
were rerun. Our analyses examined cortisol in log-transformed micro-
gram per deciliter (?g/dl) units.
2.4 | Covariates
Covariates included sex, smoking status, time of evening saliva col-
lection (Kudielka & Kirschbaum, 2003), and two measures of socio-
economic status. Food consumption and exercise were also tested
as covariates but were not included in the final models since they
were not significantly related to early life stress, depressive symp-
toms, or individual cortisol indices. Socioeconomic status (SES) was
assessed using a multidimensional summary measure, which was
comprised of the following variables: household income (weekly
income in pesos standardized to year), a household assets (sum of
the following items: home ownership, electricity in the home, type of
housing material, and ownership of items such as air conditioner,
television, refrigerator, or car), and educational attainment at both
years (years of formal schooling). Each variable was standardized
(mean = 0, SD = 1), and values were averaged to create the summary
for each year the survey was conducted in 1983, 1986, 1991, 1994,
and 2005.
In order to capture the overall SES environment during the
timespan in which the experiences of early life stress occurred,
between infancy and middle childhood, an “early life SES” variable
was constructed by summing SES scores from the 1983, 1986, 1991,
and 1994 surveys. Pairwise correlations indicate a high level of agree-
ment between SES in 1983, 1986, 1991, and 1994 as the correlation
coefficient ranged between R = 0.81 and R = 0.89, further justifying
the construction of a summary early SES variable. For the young
adulthood SES variable, participants' own education (years of formal
schooling) was used in place of parental education. Cronbach's ? for
each survey was as follows: .72 (1983), .74 (1986), .78 (1991), and
.56 (2005).
To control for the effects of recent stress, self-reported psy-
chosocial stress experienced within the last month was quantified
using a modified version of the 10-item perceived stress-scale
(PSS) (Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1994). To ensure cultural
appropriateness, all stress related questions were pilot tested and
refined in focus groups. Participants were asked to rate on a five-
point scale (0 = never, 4 = very often) how often they experienced
a particular form of stress. The PSS was administered in Cebuano
after being translated from English and back-translated to confirm
accuracy. As a result of preliminary research with the PSS in Cebu,
prior to implementation in the 2005 survey, two questions (item
9, “how often have you been angered”; item 10, “how often have
you felt difficulties were piling up”) were replaced with two new
questions: “In the last 4 weeks, how often have you dealt success-
fully with irritating life hassles?” and “In the last 4 weeks, how
often have you felt that you were effectively coping with impor-
tant changes that were occurring in your life?” Scores were
summed across all 10 questions, following reverse scoring of six
2.5 | Data analyses
All analyses were conducted using version 13.1 of Stata (Stata Corpo-
ration, College Station, TX). Depressive symptom scores, PSS, waking
cortisol, cortisol awakening response, bedtime cortisol, diurnal cortisol
slope, household income, household assets, educational attainment,
and time of evening saliva collection were all analyzed as continuous
variables. The data analysis plan consisted of four stages. First,
bivariate associations between early life stress, cortisol measures,
depressive symptom scores, and covariates were calculated
(Tables 2a and 2b). Second, we considered sex as well as past and
recent household SES as predictors. Our final model examined
whether or not associations between early life stress and depressive
symptoms are dependent on our HPA axis measures by including mea-
sures of PM cortisol and the cortisol awakening response, then diurnal
slope and the cortisol awakening response. Diurnal slope and bedtime
cortisol were not included in the same model because both variables
strongly covaried with one another (Table 2b). All cortisol models were
adjusted for time of saliva collection and smoking. ? < .05 was used as
the criterion for statistical significance.
3 | RESULTS
Nearly half of all participants reported witnessing domestic violence
participants did not feel close with their mother during adolescence
while 26% of individuals did not feel close with their father during
adolescence. A smaller proportion of respondents had a sibling die
during childhood (15.7%), faced paternal instability (2.7%), or experi-
enced maternal absence (1.2%). Eight-hundred and fifty-four individ-
uals experienced at least one stressful event and 92 adults
experienced three or more stressful events. The average adapted
depressive symptom score in the analytic sample was 9.3/29. Bivari-
ate associations between major study variables are presented in
Table 2a. Table 2b shows zero-order correlations between dis-
aggregated early life stress measures and cortisol indices.
Our first model (Model 1) assessed the relationship between our
early life stress composite measure and adult depressive symptoms
controlling for sex (Table 3a). Greater number of early life stressors
significantly predicted a higher levels of depressive symptoms at age
21–22. Results from this partial regression model also show a dose–
response relationship between the number of early life stressors and
adult depressive symptoms. Additionally, we find that males have
lower levels of depressive symptoms compared to women, which is
consistent with past literature (Maciejewski, Prigerson, &
Mazure, 2001; Nolen-Hoeksema, 2001; Weissman et al., 1993).
We then controlled for possible effects attributed to socioeco-
nomic status at both early life and 2005 (Model 2) by adding the mul-
tidimensional summary measure for both timepoints of SES. After
controlling for both past and recent SES, the relationship between
remains significant. Females had higher levels of depressive symp-
toms. Household SES at 2005 was negatively associated with depres-
sion risk scores (? = ?.69, p = .002) while household SES during early
child development did not significantly predict adult depression risk.
Our next models (Models 3 and 4) assessed whether alterations
in HPA circadian dynamics might affect relationships between early
experiences and adult depressive symptoms. We tested the relation-
ship between adult depressive symptoms and diurnal cortisol slope
(the rate of change in cortisol concentrations from morning to eve-
ning) and the cortisol awakening response while controlling for time
of evening saliva collection, smoking status, as well as recent stress,
which was assessed by an adapted version of the Perceived Stress
Scale (Cohen et al., 1994). Flatter cortisol slopes, indicated by greater
positive values, at age 21–22 predicted higher levels of depressive
symptoms (p = .003) (Table 3a, Model 4). The effect of the cortisol
awakening response did not reach significance. Including the cortisol
variables modestly altered the relationship between early life stress
and depressive symptoms as indicated by the change in the coeffi-
cient of the early life stress composite variable from Model 2 (0.4006)
to Model 4 (.353), the fully adjusted model, and the dummy coded
stress groups. Greater levels of perceived stress are significantly
related to elevated depressive symptom scores (p < 0.0001).
Because the measure of diurnal cortisol slope is calculated by
subtracting evening levels from morning levels divided by the duration
in time (Adam & Kumari, 2009; DeSantis et al., 2015), we dis-
aggregated the cortisol slope variable into separate morning and eve-
ning levels to examine which component of the diurnal cortisol
rhythm impacted depression risk (Models 5 and 6). The new fully-
adjusted regression model, which includes the morning and evening
measures in place of the slope and CAR variables, shows that on aver-
age, evening cortisol levels significantly predict adult depressive
symptoms (p = .004) (Figure 1). Greater evening cortisol concentra-
tions correspond with higher depressive symptom scores (Table 3a).
The effect of waking cortisol on adult depressive symptom is not sig-
nificant. Early life stress continues to significantly predict adult
depressive symptoms in a dose–response fashion. Similar to the
effects of diurnal slope and CAR variables in Models 3 and 4, the
inclusion of the bedtime and waking cortisol variables led to very
modest changes in the coefficient of the early life stress composite
variable from Model 2 (0.4006) to Model 6 (0.39), the complete
model, and the dummy coded stress groups.
We then disaggregated the early life stress composite measure to
examine the effects of each early life stress variable, all of which were
coded as categorical variables, on young adult depressive symptoms
(Table 3b). One categorical predictor variable was removed to serve
as the reference group. Witnessing parental violence significantly
predicted depressive symptoms at age 21–22 and increased an indi-
vidual's depressive symptom score by an average of 0.75 points in
fully adjusted models (p < .0001) (Figure 2). No other early life stress
measures significantly predicted depression risk. Being male and
greater socioeconomic status at 2005, but not during early life, cor-
responded with decreased depressive symptom severity. Similar to
the previous model, higher levels of evening cortisol significantly asso-
ciated with higher depressive symptom scores (p = .005).
Finally, we conducted a separate analysis to examine whether
early life stress affected young adult cortisol rhythms. Our results
show no significant relationships between the early life stress com-
posite measure and any of the diurnal cortisol measures (e.g., waking,
cortisol awakening response, evening, diurnal slope). After dis-
aggregating the early life stress composite measure, however, those
who witnessed domestic violence during childhood exhibited signifi-
cantly lower levels of bedtime cortisol (p = .018).
4 | DISCUSSION
Our findings suggest that early life stress, witnessing domestic vio-
lence during childhood, and alterations in adult HPA axis function pre-
dict the severity of depressive symptoms during adulthood in this
sample of Cebuano young adults. However, contrary to previous find-
ings in the literature, these relationships appeared to be independent
of one another, as indicated by the modest changes in the relationship
between early life stress and adult depression risk after controlling for
HPA axis measures (Tables 3a and 3b). Thus, we report that diurnal
cortisol activity does not affect adult depressive symptoms as a result
of early life stress during child development. Our early life stress com-
posite measure also did not predict diurnal cortisol patterns during
youngadulthood in this sample, but witnessing domestic violence dur-
ing childhood predicted lower bedtime cortisol levels.
Our findings linking early life stress and diurnal cortisol rhythms
with depression are in general agreement with past work investigating
similar questions. We confirm the overall positive association previ-
ously reported between early life stress and adult depressive symp-
toms (Heim & Binder, 2012; Taylor et al., 2011) as seen by the direct
relationship between our composite measure of early life stress and
adult depressive symptoms (Figure 3) as well as the long-term adult
depressive impacts of witnessing domestic violence during childhood.
When examining the relationships between each individual, dis-
aggregated stress measure and young adult depression risk, with
exception to witnessing domestic violence, none of our additional
measures of early life stress significantly predicted depressive symp-
tomatology independently (Table 3b). When considering the cumula-
tive effects of these measures, however, exposure to more of these
stressors during development is associated with worse depressive
outcomes in early adulthood. This result indicates that it may take an
accumulation of several stressful experiences and conditions to pro-
duce a larger and detectable impact on adult mental health in our sam-
analyses, past research suggests that these family-based stressors
pose threats to future mental health in other groups. The deleterious
effects of parental and sibling absence on mental health have been
widely documented in the literature. In past studies, individuals who
experienced parental loss, defined as either a prolonged absence or
death of a parental figure, during childhood were more likely to report
depression and generalized anxiety disorder (Kendler, Heath, &
Eaves, 1992; Tyrka et al., 2008) and exhibit signs of HPA axis dys-
regulation (Breier, 1989; Luecken, 2000; Meinlschmidt & Heim 2005;
Nicolson, 2004; Tyrka, Wier, Price, Ross, & Carpenter, 2008). Simi-
larly, experiencing the loss of a sibling during adolescence was signifi-
cantly associated with symptoms of anxiety and depression during
mid-adulthood among individuals who lost a sibling to cystic fibrosis
(Fanos & Nickerson, 1991), though the literature on the long-term
impacts of sibling loss is sparse. Further research may uncover poten-
tial sources of buffering against the long-term mental health impacts
of parental and sibling loss.
Our results also report that flatter adult diurnal cortisol slopes,
but not concentrations of waking cortisol or the cortisol awakening
response, are directly associated with adult depressive symptoms.
This finding is consistent with an increasing body of literature that
strongly suggeststhat flatter diurnal cortisol rhythms may be a distinct
characteristic of certain forms of depression and other physical and
mental diseases (Adam, 2012; Balardin, Vedana, Luz, &
Bromberg, 2011; Bhattacharyya, Molloy, & Steptoe, 2008; Jarcho
et al., 2013; Knight, Avery, Janssen, & Powell, 2010; Weinrib
et al., 2010). Past studies have found that flatter diurnal cortisol
rhythms occur due to either lower morning cortisol, higher evening
cortisol, or both, all of which are indications of HPA axis dysregulation
(DeSantis et al., 2015; Doane et al., 2013; Lopez-Duran et al. 2009;
Weinrib et al., 2010), a strongly implicated mechanism of adult
depression (Adam et al., 2010; Arborelius et al. 1999; Doane
et al., 2013; Heim & Binder, 2012; Jarcho et al., 2013; Mangold
et al., 2011; Plotsky et al., 1998; Vrshek-Schallhorn et al., 2013). Dis-
aggregating the slope measure showed that higher evening cortisol
levels predominantly accounted for the effects of cortisol diurnal
rhythms on adult depression symptomatology (Figure 1). The positive
association between evening cortisol concentrations and adult
depressive symptoms is also consistent with previous studies (Gold
et al., 1988; Plotsky et al., 1998; Young et al., 1994). While we did not
find any significant links between the cortisol awakening response
and depressive symptoms, prior research has reported altered cortisol
awakening responses among depressed adults. These findings tend to
report elevated cortisol awakening responses during depression
(Bhagwagar, Hafizi, & Cowen, 2003; Pruessner et al., 2003), though
negative associations have also been reported (Stetler & Miller 2005;
Ellenbogen et al. 2006; van der Vegt et al., 2009). Variations in the neu-
roendocrine profiles of depressed patients across studies may relate to
the severity of depression considered in each study, which ranges from
heightened depressed mood within the normal range of symptomatol-
ogy tomajor depressive disorder (Chida & Steptoe, 2009).
We also find that individuals who witnessed domestic violence
during adolescence tended to have lower bedtime cortisol levels at
age 21–22, while there were no differences in the cortisol awakening
response. The association between witnessing domestic violence and
lower bedtime cortisol levels was an unexpected finding as past stud-
ies have generally found that early life adversity corresponds with
greater evening levels. For example, Engert et al. (2011) and Nicol-
care and experienced a loss of a parent either by death or separation
exhibited higher bedtime cortisol levels during adulthood. Addition-
ally, in a meta-analysis of chronic stress and HPA axis, experiencing
chronic stressors that posed physical threats, were traumatic in
nature, and uncontrollable were associated with elevated evening cor-
tisol levels (Miller, Chen, & Zhou, 2007). Although several studies have
reported null associations between early life stress and adult evening
cortisol concentrations (Gerritsen et al., 2010; Gonzalez et al., 2009;
Miller et al., 2009; van der Vegt et al., 2009), a smaller number of
studies have reported similar links between greater early adversity
and lower evening cortisol levels that we report. Gustafsson
et al. (2010) found that decreased evening levels among women who
lived in low socioeconomic status households as adolescents. In our
study, the association between decreased evening cortisol levels dur-
ing young adulthood and witnessing domestic violence during adoles-
cence may be a function of the timing since the onset of stress. In the
same meta-analysis, Miller et al. (2007) argue that the seemingly con-
tradictory findings between hyper- and hypocortisolism among
chronically-stressed adults “simply reflect different timepoints during
the stress process” (35). Upon exposure to stress, the HPA axis may
become activated, causing a rise in circulating cortisol levels. Over-
time, the HPA axis may mount a counter-regulatory response
whereby cortisol output rebounds below normal levels (Miller
et al., 2007). The transition from hypercortisolism to hypocortisolism
has also been interpreted as a result of the HPA axis losing its resil-
ience overtime (McEwen, 1998). Several studies that examine neuro-
endocrine patterns associated with past stressors have documented
decreases in HPA axis output (Carpenter et al., 2007; Rohleder,
Joksimovic, Wolf, & Kirschbaum, 2004; Yehuda et al., 1995; Yehuda,
Boisonuae, Lowy,& Giller, 1995; Yehuda, Resnick, Schmeidler, Yang, &
Pitman, 1998; Yehuda, Teicher, Trestman, Levengood, &
Siever, 1996). Additionally, studies on the early life impacts on the
cortisol awakening response tend to report positive relationships. For
example, individuals exposed to an array of stressful life experiences
during child development such as parental loss and child maltreatment
(Gonzalez et al., 2009) and neglect and abuse (van der Vegt
et al., 2009), and adverse social conditions such as low socioeconomic
status (Gustafsson et al., 2010) generally exhibited heightened cortisol
awakening responses compared to their respective comparison
groups. Nonetheless, several studies have reported opposing or non-
significant findings (Miller et al., 2009). Similar to our prior consider-
ation with depression, differences in the early life stress-HPA axis
relationship seen across these studies may be explained by the partic-
ular qualities of early life stress in question, such as the frequency,
severity, and social meaning of the psychosocial stressor or environ-
mental condition (Fogelman & Canli, 2018; Lyons & Parker, 2007;
Miller et al., 2007).
Previous findings from CLHNS reported the predictive effects of
witnessing domestic violence during child development on adult
depressive symptoms (Hindin & Gultiano, 2006). This study confirms
the positive relationship between witnessing domestic violence and
adult depressive symptoms and expands the scope of stressful experi-
additional measures of psychosocial stress, which include the absence
of one's father, the absence of one's mother, death of a sibling, and
feeling distant from one's mother and father. This study further
emphasizes the role that early life experiences have on shaping the
HPA axis in this sample. DeSantis et al. (2015) reported that chroni-
cally low socioeconomic status from infancy to early adulthood
predicted diurnal HPA axis rhythms in adulthood. The direction of the
relationships between both measures of early life adversity and
depression, however, were opposing. Cumulative economic strain
from prenatal development to early adulthood was associated with
higher bedtime cortisol levels, lower CARs, and other characteristics
of HPA axis dysregulation (i.e., lower total cortisol output, flatter corti-
sol slopes) while our findings show that witnessing domestic violence
predicted lower bedtime cortisol levels. As previously mentioned, the
nature of the stressor in question may explain the varying relation-
ships between early life stress and HPA axis function seen across
studies, though the lack of specificity in our survey question on wit-
nessing domestic violence preclude us from ascertaining the particular
qualities of the stressor that may explain our discrepant finding.
Considering the inverse relationship between witnessing domes-
tic violence and adult evening cortisol levels, the finding that bedtime
cortisol levels do not influence the relationship between early life
stress and depressive symptoms is expected statistically but concep-
tually perplexing. The strengthened relationship between early life
stress and adult depressive symptoms after including the bedtime cor-
tisol variable suggests that early life stress predicts depressive symp-
toms despite the fact that individuals in our sample tend to exhibit
cortisol levels of non-depressed individuals. We intended on con-
ducting a mediation analysis to evaluate the links between early life
stress, cortisol levels, and depressive risk, but our results did not meet
the criteria for mediation analysis as all three variables were not sig-
nificantly correlated to one another. While cross-sectional measure of
HPA axis function may not be related to the depressive effects of
early life stress during young adulthood, HPA axis function at earlier
stages of development may still influence one's risk of later life
depression (Adam et al., 2010; Bockting et al., 2012; Goodyer, Bacon,
Ban, Croudace, & Herbert, 2009; Vrshek-Schallhorn et al., 2013).
These findings also suggest that additional biological mechanisms may
facilitate the durable effects of early life experiences on later life
health. Other biological pathways of HPA axis function that have pre-
viously been implicated in the early life stress-adult depression path-
way include upstream mechanisms like epigenetic variation (e.g., DNA
methylation, histone modification) (Heim & Binder, 2012; Khulan
et al., 2014; Smith, Parets, & Kim, 2014) and downstream pathways
such as inflammatory (immune activation, gut-brain axis) (Pace
et al., 2006) and neurobiological mechanisms (e.g., neurotransmission,
neuroanatomic changes) (Gatt et al., 2010; Grant, Cannistraci, Hollon,
Gore, & Shelton, 2011). For example, early life stress has been
hypothesized to influence differential methylation signatures among
HPA axis-related genes, such as the glucocorticoid receptor gene,
which in may alter the binding of cortisol and its subsequent impact
on adult depression (Heim & Binder, 2012; Jawahar, Murgatroyd,
Harrison, & Baune, 2015).
Future studies can further elucidate the role of HPA axis function
in contributing to the long-term effects of early life stress on adult
depressive symptomatology by waiting to evaluate adult depressive
risk a few months or years after cortisol measurements are collected.
This longitudinal design can help clarify whether the durability of
altered adult cortisol activity due to early life stress is what influences
later life depressive symptoms and eliminates the possibility of
reverse causality between cross-sectional measures of depressive
symptoms and cortisol levels, as seen in our study. Reliable and cultur-
ally validated measures of early life stress and depression will also
strengthen the internal validity of future studies, and multiple days of
cortisol collection with daily assessments of mood, behaviors, and
experience will better characterize typical diurnal cortisol rhythms.
Finally, additional stress-sensitive mechanism that are both upstream
and downstream of HPA axis function can be assessed to identify
other biological pathways involved in the long-term depressive effects
of early life stress.
4.1 | Limitations
The first limitation of this study is our crude measure of early life
stress. Our variables were limited to family-level experiences and con-
ditions that were reduced to only six dummy variables. There are
likely a wide variety of stressors across multiple domains and levels of
life that may have similar long-term effects on mental health and, in
general, affect the body. Different dimensions of psychosocial stress,
such as a more diverse set of experiences and conditions (various
forms of social oppression, disease and illness experience, teratogens,
etc.), chronicity, severity, and sociocultural meaning, could have dis-
tinct and varied sequelae on HPA axis function (e.g., diurnal cortisol
rhythm, stress reactivity) and later life health.
The cultural relevance and psychometric validity of the depres-
sion screener used in this study (i.e., CES-D) may be another source of
bias. While the Cronbach's alpha meets the threshold for scale valid-
ity, the comprehensibility and relevance of the sub-constructs
included in the CES-D may be compromised because of their lack of
cultural relevance and salience. The same concern applies to other
survey tools used in this study, such as the Perceived Stress Scale.
Third, our process of sampling and measuring the cortisol awak-
ening response did not meet expert guidelines as outlined Stalder
et al. (2016). Only two post-awakening samples were obtained to
assess the CAR (at waking and 30 min later), rather than the rec-
ommended minimum of three. In addition, cortisol data were collected
across 2 days—the first at bedtime and the next two immediately
upon waking and 30 min later. Because momentary- and day-level
changes in emotions and social experiences shape cortisol levels
(Adam, 2006), it is preferred to collect samples for diurnal cortisol
across multiple days (Adam & Kumari, 2009). Additionally, in order to
maximize sample efficiency in this large, longitudinal sample for which
home-based sample refrigeration was not available, the diurnal
rhythm was first assessed at bedtime and followed into the next day.
Low compliance to saliva collection instructions at specific timepoints
5 | CONCLUSION
In summary, early life family-related stressors predicted greater severity
of depressive symptoms at early adulthood in a dose–response fashion
and witnessing domestic violence during child development predicted
lower levels of evening cortisol in this large, naturalistic, non-Western,
and longitudinal sample of individuals in metropolitanCebu, Philippines.
When considering the cumulative effects of early life family-based
adversity, greater exposure to these stressors during development
predicted worse depressive outcomes in early adulthood. While both
bedtime cortisol and diurnal cortisol slopes significantly predicted adult
depressive symptoms cross-sectionally, adult cortisol levels did not
explain the effect of early life stress on adult depressive symptoms.
Furthermore, this analysis does not support the notion that the depres-
sive impacts of early life stress are influenced by HPA axis function in
this particular stage of young adulthood and this sample. Given our lim-
ited saliva collection protocols and that we measured cortisol at only
one stage of adulthood, more robust measures of HPA axis function
across multiple time points throughout development may uncover pos-
sible sensitive periods that may be involved in the psychobiological
development of adult depression. Additionally, we also note that our
early life stress compositevariable is limited as it is not a validated mea-
sure of family-based stress in Cebu. Nonetheless, these findings sug-
gest that the long-term depressive effects of certain forms of early life
stress extend to this large sample in the Philippines, and that early life
stress and HPA axis function at age 21–22 in this sample may shape
adult depression through independent pathways in our sample. Our
results provide further evidence that HPA axis activity is shaped by
early life conditions and is associated with depressive symptoms, and
that early life development is an important period research and inter-
vention for improving globalmental health.
We thank the many scholars and researchers at the Office of Popula-
in study design and data collection, and the Filipino participants who
generously provided their time for this study.
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in
UNC Dataverse at https://dataverse.unc.edu/.
Adam, E. K. (2006). Transactions among adolescent trait and state emotion
and diurnal and momentary cortisol activity in naturalistic settings.
Adam, E. K. (2012). Emotion—Cortisol transactions occur over multiple
time scales in development: Implications for research on emotion and
the development of emotional disorders. Monographs of the Society for
Angold, A., & Worthman, C. W. (1993). Puberty onset of gender differ-
ences in rates of depression: A developmental, epidemiologic and neu-
roendocrine perspective. Journal of Affective Disorders, 29(2),
Balardin, J. B., Vedana, G., Luz, C., & Bromberg, E. (2011). Subjective mild
depressive symptoms are associated with abnormal diurnal cycle of
salivary cortisol in older adults. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neu-
rology, 24(1), 19–22.
Barker, D. J. (1999). Fetal origins of cardiovascular disease. Annals of medi-
cine, 31(sup1), 3–6.
Bhagwagar, Z., Hafizi, S., & Cowen, P. J. (2003). Increase in concentration
of waking salivary cortisol in recovered patients with depression. The
Bhattacharyya, M. R., Molloy, G. J., & Steptoe, A. (2008). Depression is
associated with flatter cortisol rhythms in patients with coronary
Breier, A. (1989). Experimental approaches to human stress research:
Assessment of neurobiological mechanisms of stress in volunteers and
psychiatric patients. Biological Psychiatry, 26, 438–462.
Butler, K., Klaus, K., Edwards, L., & Pennington, K. (2017). Elevated cortisol
awakening response associated with early life stress and impaired
executive function in healthy adult males. Hormones and Behavior, 95,
13–21.
Carnut?{t\hskip-0.7ex\char "B8}a, M., Cris?an, L. G., Vulturar, R., Opre, A., &
Miu, A. C. (2015). Emotional non-acceptance links early life stress and
blunted cortisol reactivity to social threat. Psychoneuroendocrinology,
51, 176–187.
Carpenter, L. L., Carvalho, J. P., Tyrka, A. R., Wier, L. M., Mello, A. F.,
Mello, M. F., … Price, L. H. (2007). Decreased adrenocorticotropic
hormone and cortisol responses to stress in healthy adults reporting
significant childhood maltreatment. Biological Psychiatry, 62,
1080–1087.
Carpenter, L. L., Shattuck, T. T., Tyrka, A. R., Geracioti, T. D., & Price, L. H.
(2011). Effect of childhood physical abuse on cortisol stress response.
Doane, L. D., Mineka, S., Zinbarg, R. E., Craske, M., Griffith, J. W., &
Adam, E. K. (2013). Are flatter diurnal cortisol rhythms associated with
major depression and anxiety disorders in late adolescence? The role
of life stress and daily negative emotion. Development and Psychopa-
thology, 25(3), 629–642.
Ellenbogen, M. A., Hodgins, S., Walker, C. D., Couture, S., & Adam, S.
(2006). Daytime cortisol and stress reactivity in the offspring of par-
ents with bipolar disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 31(10), 1164–
Elzinga, B. M., Roelofs, K., Tollenaar, M. S., Bakvis, P., van Pelt, J., &
Spinhoven, P. (2008). Diminished cortisol responses to psychosocial
stress associated with lifetime adverse events: A study among healthy
young subjects. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 33(2), 227–237.
Engert, V., Efanov, S. I., Dedovic, K., Dagher, A., & Pruessner, J. C. (2011).
Increased cortisol awakening response and afternoon/evening cortisol
output in healthy young adults with low early life parental care. Psy-
Gatt, J. M., Nemeroff, C. B., Schofield, P. R., Paul, R. H., Clark, C. R.,
Gordon, E., & Williams, L. M. (2010). Early life stress combined with
serotonin 3A receptor and brain-derived neurotrophic factor valine
66 to methionine genotypes impacts emotional brain and arousal cor-
relates of risk for depression. BiologicalPsychiatry, 68(9), 818–824.
Gerritsen, L., Geerlings, M. I., Beekman, A. T., Deeg, D. J.,
Penninx, B. W., & Comijs, H. C. (2010). Early and late life events and
salivary cortisol in older persons. Psychological Medicine, 40(9),
1569–1578.
Gold, P. W., Goodwin, F. K., & Chrousos, G. P. (1988). Clinical and bio-
chemical manifestations of depression. Relation to neurobiology of
Gonzalez, A., Jenkins, J. M., Steiner, M., & Fleming, A. S. (2009). The rela-
tion between early life adversity, cortisol awakening response and
diurnal salivary cortisol levels in postpartum women.
Heim, C., & Binder, E. B. (2012). Current research trends in early life stress
and depression: Review of human studies on sensitive periods, gene–
environment interactions, and epigenetics. Experimental Neurology,
233(1), 102–111.
Heim, C., Newport, D. J., Heit, S., Graham, Y. P., Wilcox, M., Bonsall, R., …
Nemeroff, C. B. (2000). Pituitary – Adrenal and autonomic responses
to stress in women after sexual and physical abuse in childhood. Jour-
Jarcho, M. R., Slavich, G. M., Tylova-Stein, H., Wolkowitz, O. M., &
Burke, H. M. (2013). Dysregulated diurnal cortisol pattern is associated
with glucocorticoid resistance in women with major depressive disor-
Kudielka, B. M., Buchtal, J., Uhde, A., & Wust, S. (2007). Circadian cortisol
profiles and psychological self-reports in shift workers with and with-
out recent change in the shift rotation system. Biological Psychology,
74(1), 92–103.
Kudielka, B. M., & Kirschbaum, C. (2003). Awakening cortisol responses
are influenced by health status and awakening time but not by men-
Lovallo, W. R., Farag, N. H., Sorocco, K. H., Cohoon, A. J., & Vincent, A. S.
(2012). Lifetime adversity leads to blunted stress axis reactivity: Stud-
ies from the Oklahoma family health patterns project. Biological Psychi-
atry, 71(4), 344–349.
Luecken, L. J. (2000). Parental caring and loss during childhood and adult
cortisol responses to stress. Psychology and Health, 15, 841–851.
Luecken, L. J., & Appelhans, B. M. (2006). Early parental loss and salivary
cortisol in young adulthood: The moderating role of family environ-
Nicolson, N. A. (2004). Childhood parental loss and cortisol levels in adult
Niu, S. F., Chung, M. H., Chen, C. H., Hegney, D., O'Brien, A., & Chou, K. R.
(2011). The effect of shift rotation on employee cortisol profile, sleep
quality, fatigue, and attention level: A systematic review. Journal of
van der Vegt, E. J., Van Der Ende, J., Kirschbaum, C., Verhulst, F. C., &
Tiemeier, H. (2009). Early neglect and abuse predict diurnal cortisol
patterns in adults: A study of international adoptees.
Wiersma, J. E., Hovens, J. G., van Oppen, P., Giltay, E. J., van Schaik, D. J.,
Beekman, A. T., & Penninx, B. W. (2009). The importance of childhood
trauma and childhood life events for chronicity of depression in adults.
